JANUARY 1659-1660

     [The year did not legally begin in England before the 25th March
     until the act for altering the style fixed the 1st of January as the
     first day of the year, and previous to 1752 the year extended from
     March 25th to the following March 24th.  Thus since 1752 we have
     been in the habit of putting the two dates for the months of January
     and February and March 1 to 24--in all years previous to 1752.
     Practically, however, many persons considered the year to commence
     with January 1st, as it will be seen Pepys did.  The 1st of January
     was considered as New Year’s day long before Pepys’s time.  The
     fiscal year has not been altered; and the national accounts are
     still reckoned from old Lady Day, which falls on the 6th of April.]

Blessed be God, at the end of the last year I was in very good health,
without any sense of my old pain, but upon taking of cold.

     [Pepys was successfully cut for the stone on March 26th, 1658.  See
     March 26th below.  Although not suffering from this cause again
     until the end of his life, there are frequent references in the
     Diary to pain whenever he caught cold.  In a letter from Pepys to
     his nephew Jackson, April 8th, 1700, there is a reference to the
     breaking out three years before his death of the wound caused by the
     cutting for the stone: “It has been my calamity for much the
     greatest part of this time to have been kept bedrid, under an evil
     so rarely known as to have had it matter of universal surprise and
     with little less general opinion of its dangerousness; namely, that
     the cicatrice of a wound occasioned upon my cutting for the stone,
     without hearing anything of it in all this time, should after more
     than 40 years’ perfect cure, break out again.”  At the post-mortem
     examination a nest of seven stones, weighing four and a half ounces,
     was found in the left kidney, which was entirely ulcerated.]

I lived in Axe Yard,

     [Pepys’s house was on the south side of King Street, Westminster;
     it is singular that when he removed to a residence in the city, he
     should have settled close to another Axe Yard.  Fludyer Street
     stands on the site of Axe Yard, which derived its name from a great
     messuage or brewhouse on the west side of King Street, called “The
     Axe,” and referred to in a document of the 23rd of Henry VIII--B.]

having my wife, and servant Jane, and no more in family than us three.
My wife.... gave me hopes of her being with child, but on the last day
of the year....[the hope was belied.]

[Ed. note:.... are used to denote censored passages]

The condition of the State was thus; viz. the Rump, after being
disturbed by my Lord Lambert,

     [John Lambert, major-general in the Parliamentary army.  The title
     Lord was not his by right, but it was frequently given to the
     republican officers.  He was born in 1619, at Calton Hall, in the
     parish of Kirkby-in-Malham-Dale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
     In 1642 he was appointed captain of horse under Fairfax, and acted
     as major-general to Cromwell in 1650 during the war in Scotland.
     After this Parliament conferred on him a grant of lands in Scotland
     worth L1000 per annum.  He refused to take the oath of allegiance to
     Cromwell, for which the Protector deprived him of his commission.
     After Cromwell’s death he tried to set up a military government.
     The Commons cashiered Lambert, Desborough, and other officers,
     October 12th, 1659, but Lambert retaliated by thrusting out the
     Commons, and set out to meet Monk.  His men fell away from him, and
     he was sent to the Tower, March 3rd, 1660, but escaped.  In 1662 he
     was tried on a charge of high treason and condemned, but his life
     was spared.  It is generally stated that he passed the remainder of
     his life in the island of Guernsey, but this is proved to be
     incorrect by a MS. in the Plymouth Athenaeum, entitled “Plimmouth
     Memoirs collected by James Yonge, 1684” This will be seen from the
     following extracts quoted by Mr. R. J. King, in “Notes and Queries,”
      “1667 Lambert the arch-rebel brought to this island [St. Nicholas,
     at the entrance of Plymouth harbour].”  “1683 Easter day Lambert
     that olde rebell dyed this winter on Plimmouth Island where he had
     been prisoner 15 years and more.”]

was lately returned to sit again. The officers of the Army all forced to
yield. Lawson

     [Sir John Lawson, the son of a poor man at Hull, entered the navy as
     a common sailor, rose to the rank of admiral, and distinguished
     himself during the Protectorate.  Though a republican, he readily
     closed with the design of restoring the King.  He was vice-admiral
     under the Earl of Sandwich, and commanded the “London” in the
     squadron which conveyed Charles II. to England.  He was mortally
     wounded in the action with the Dutch off Harwich, June, 1665.  He
     must not be confounded with another John Lawson, the Royalist, of
     Brough Hall, in Yorkshire, who was created a Baronet by Charles II,
     July 6th, 1665.]

lies still in the river, and Monk--[George Monk, born 1608, created Duke
of Albemarle, 1660, married Ann Clarges, March, 1654, died January 3rd,
1676.]--is with his army in Scotland. Only my Lord Lambert is not yet
come into the Parliament, nor is it expected that he will without being
forced to it. The new Common Council of the City do speak very high; and
had sent to Monk their sword-bearer, to acquaint him with their desires
for a free and full Parliament, which is at present the desires, and the
hopes, and expectation of all. Twenty-two of the old secluded members

     [“The City sent and invited him [Monk] to dine the next day at
     Guildhall, and there he declared for the members whom the army had
     forced away in year forty-seven and forty-eight, who were known by
     the names of secluded members.”--Burnet’s Hist. of his Own Time,
     book i.]

having been at the House-door the last week to demand entrance, but it
was denied them; and it is believed that [neither] they nor the people
will be satisfied till the House be filled. My own private condition
very handsome, and esteemed rich, but indeed very poor; besides my goods
of my house, and my office, which at present is somewhat uncertain. Mr.
Downing master of my office.

     [George Downing was one of the Four Tellers of the Receipt of the
     Exchequer, and in his office Pepys was a clerk.  He was the son of
     Emmanuel Downing of the Inner Temple, afterwards of Salem,
     Massachusetts, and of Lucy, sister of Governor John Winthrop.  He is
     supposed to have been born in August, 1623.  He and his parents went
     to New England in 1638, and he was the second graduate of Harvard
     College.  He returned to England about 1645, and acted as Colonel
     Okey’s chaplain before he entered into political life.  Anthony a
     Wood (who incorrectly describes him as the son of Dr. Calybute
     Downing, vicar of Hackney) calls Downing a sider with all times and
     changes: skilled in the common cant, and a preacher occasionally.
     He was sent by Cromwell to Holland in 1657, as resident there.  At
     the Restoration, he espoused the King’s cause, and was knighted and
     elected M.P. for Morpeth, in 1661.  Afterwards, becoming
     Secretary to the Treasury and Commissioner of the Customs, he was in
     1663 created a Baronet of East Hatley, in Cambridgeshire, and was
     again sent Ambassador to Holland.  His grandson of the same name,
     who died in 1749, was the founder of Downing College, Cambridge.
     The title became extinct in 1764, upon the decease of Sir John
     Gerrard Downing, the last heir-male of the family.  Sir George
     Downing’s character will be found in Lord Clarendon’s “Life,” vol.
     iii.  p. 4.  Pepys’s opinion seems to be somewhat of a mixed kind.
     He died in July, 1684.]

Jan. 1st (Lord’s day). This morning (we living lately in the garret,)
I rose, put on my suit with great skirts, having not lately worn any
other, clothes but them. Went to Mr. Gunning’s

     [Peter Gunning, afterwards Master of St. John’s College, Cambridge,
     and successively Bishop of Chichester and Ely.  He had continued to
     read the Liturgy at the chapel at Exeter House when the Parliament
     was most predominant, for which Cromwell often rebuked him.  Evelyn
     relates that on Christmas Day, 1657, the chapel was surrounded with
     soldiers, and the congregation taken prisoners, he and his wife
     being among them.  There are several notices of Dr. Gunning in
     Evelyn’s Diary.  When he obtained the mastership of St. John’s
     College upon the ejection of Dr. Tuckney, he allowed that
     Nonconformist divine a handsome annuity during his life.  He was a
     great controversialist, and a man of great reading.  Burnet says he
     “was a very honest sincere man, but of no sound judgment, and of no
     prudence in affairs” (“Hist. of his Own.  Time”).  He died July 6th,
     1684, aged seventy-one.]

chapel at Exeter House, where he made a very good sermon upon these
words:--“That in the fulness of time God sent his Son, made of a woman,”
 &c.; showing, that, by “made under the law,” is meant his circumcision,
which is solemnized this day. Dined at home in the garret, where my wife
dressed the remains of a turkey, and in the doing of it she burned her
hand. I staid at home all the afternoon, looking over my accounts; then
went with my wife to my father’s, and in going observed the great posts
which the City have set up at the Conduit in Fleet-street. Supt at my
father’s, where in came Mrs. The. Turner--[Theophila Turner, daughter of
Sergeant John and Jane Turner, who married Sir Arthur Harris, Bart. She
died 1686.]--and Madam Morrice, and supt with us. After that my wife and
I went home with them, and so to our own home.

2nd. In the morning before I went forth old East brought me a dozen of
bottles of sack, and I gave him a shilling for his pains. Then I went to
Mr. Sheply,--[Shepley was a servant of Admiral Sir Edward Montagu]--who
was drawing of sack in the wine cellar to send to other places as a gift
from my Lord, and told me that my Lord had given him order to give me
the dozen of bottles. Thence I went to the Temple to speak with Mr.
Calthropp about the L60 due to my Lord,

     [Sir Edward Montagu, born 1625, son of Sir Sidney Montagu, by
     Paulina, daughter of John Pepys of Cottenham, married Jemima,
     daughter of John Crew of Stene.  He died in action against the Dutch
     in Southwold Bay, May 28th, 1672.  The title of “My Lord” here
     applied to Montagu before he was created Earl of Sandwich is of the
     same character as that given to General Lambert.]

but missed of him, he being abroad. Then I went to Mr. Crew’s

     [John Crew, born 1598, eldest son of Sir Thomas Crew, Sergeant-at-
     Law and Speaker of the House of Commons.  He sat for Brackley in the
     Long Parliament.  Created Baron Crew of Stene, in the county of
     Northampton, at the coronation of Charles II.  He married Jemima,
     daughter and co-heir of Edward Walgrave (or Waldegrave) of Lawford,
     Essex.  His house was in Lincoln’s Inn Fields.  He died December
     12th, 1679.]

and borrowed L10 of Mr. Andrewes for my own use, and so went to my
office, where there was nothing to do. Then I walked a great while in
Westminster Hall, where I heard that Lambert was coming up to London;
that my Lord Fairfax

     [Thomas, Lord Fairfax, Generalissimo of the Parliament forces.
     After the Restoration, he retired to his country seat, where he
     lived in private till his death, 1671.  In a volume (autograph) of
     Lord Fairfax’s Poems, preserved in the British Museum, 11744, f. 42,
     the following lines occur upon the 30th of January, on which day the
     King was beheaded.  It is believed that they have never been
     printed.

              “O let that day from time be bloted quitt,
               And beleef of ‘t in next age be waved,
               In depest silence that act concealed might,
               That so the creadet of our nation might be saved;
               But if the powre devine hath ordered this,
               His will’s the law, and our must aquiess.”

     These wretched verses have obviously no merit; but they are curious
     as showing that Fairfax, who had refused to act as one of Charles
     I’s judges; continued long afterwards to entertain a proper horror
     for that unfortunate monarch’s fate.  It has recently been pointed
     out to me, that the lines were not originally composed by Fairfax,
     being only a poor translation of the spirited lines of Statius
     (Sylvarum lib. v.  cap. ii.  l. 88)

              “Excidat illa dies aevo, ne postera credant
               Secula, nos certe taceamus; et obruta multa
               Nocte tegi propria patiamur crimina gentis.”

     These verses were first applied by the President de Thou to the
     massacre of St. Bartholomew, 1572; and in our day, by Mr. Pitt, in
     his memorable speech in the House of Commons, January, 1793, after
     the murder of Louis XVI.--B.]

was in the head of the Irish brigade, but it was not certain what he
would declare for. The House was to-day upon finishing the act for the
Council of State, which they did; and for the indemnity to the soldiers;
and were to sit again thereupon in the afternoon. Great talk that many
places have declared for a free Parliament; and it is believed that they
will be forced to fill up the House with the old members. From the Hall
I called at home, and so went to Mr. Crew’s (my wife she was to go to
her father’s), thinking to have dined, but I came too late, so Mr. Moore
and I and another gentleman went out and drank a cup of ale together
in the new market, and there I eat some bread and cheese for my dinner.
After that Mr. Moore and I went as far as Fleet-street together and
parted, he going into the City, I to find Mr. Calthrop, but failed again
of finding him, so returned to Mr. Crew’s again, and from thence went
along with Mrs. Jemimah

     [Mrs. Jemimah, or Mrs. Jem, was Jemima, eldest daughter of Sir
     Edward Montagu.  At this time she and her sister, Mrs. Ann, seem to
     have been living alone with their maids in London, and Pepys’s duty
     was to look after them.]

home, and there she taught me how to play at cribbage. Then I went home,
and finding my wife gone to see Mrs. Hunt, I went to Will’s,

     [Pepys constantly visited “Will’s” about this time; but this could
     not be the famous coffee-house in Covent Garden, because he mentions
     visiting there for the first time, February 3rd, 1663-64.  It was
     most probably the house of William Joyce, who kept a place of
     entertainment at Westminster (see Jan. 29th).]

and there sat with Mr. Ashwell talking and singing till nine o’clock,
and so home, there, having not eaten anything but bread and cheese, my
wife cut me a slice of brawn which. I received from my Lady;--[Jemima,
wife of Sir Edward Montagu, daughter of John Crew of Stene, afterwards
Lord Crew.]--which proves as good as ever I had any. So to bed, and my
wife had a very bad night of it through wind and cold.

3rd. I went out in the morning, it being a great frost, and walked to
Mrs. Turner’s

     [Jane, daughter of John Pepys of South Creake, Norfolk, married to
     John Turner, Sergeant-at-law, Recorder of York; their only child,
     Theophila, frequently mentioned as The.  or Theoph., became the wife
     of Sir Arthur Harris, Bart., of Stowford, Devon, and died 1686,
     s.p.]

to stop her from coming to see me to-day, because of Mrs. Jem’s corning,
thence I went to the Temple to speak with Mr. Calthrop, and walked in
his chamber an hour, but could not see him, so went to Westminster,
where I found soldiers in my office to receive money, and paid it them.
At noon went home, where Mrs. Jem, her maid, Mr. Sheply, Hawly, and
Moore dined with me on a piece of beef and cabbage, and a collar of
brawn. We then fell to cards till dark, and then I went home with Mrs.
Jem, and meeting Mr. Hawly got him to bear me company to Chancery Lane,
where I spoke with Mr. Calthrop, he told me that Sir James Calthrop was
lately dead, but that he would write to his Lady, that the money may be
speedily paid. Thence back to White Hall, where I understood that the
Parliament had passed the act for indemnity to the soldiers and officers
that would come in, in so many days, and that my Lord Lambert should
have benefit of the said act. They had also voted that all vacancies in
the House, by the death of any of the old members, shall be filled up;
but those that are living shall not be called in. Thence I went home,
and there found Mr. Hunt and his wife, and Mr. Hawly, who sat with me
till ten at night at cards, and so broke up and to bed.

4th. Early came Mr. Vanly--[Mr Vanley appears to have been Pepys’s
landlord; he is mentioned again in the Diary on September 20th,
1660.]--to me for his half-year’s rent, which I had not in the house,
but took his man to the office and there paid him. Then I went down
into the Hall and to Will’s, where Hawly brought a piece of his Cheshire
cheese, and we were merry with it. Then into the Hall again, where I met
with the Clerk and Quarter Master of my Lord’s troop, and took them to
the Swan’ and gave them their morning’s draft,

     [It was not usual at this time to sit down to breakfast, but instead
     a morning draught was taken at a tavern.]

they being just come to town. Mr. Jenkins shewed me two bills of
exchange for money to receive upon my Lord’s and my pay. It snowed hard
all this morning, and was very cold, and my nose was much swelled with
cold. Strange the difference of men’s talk! Some say that Lambert must
of necessity yield up; others, that he is very strong, and that the
Fifth-monarchy-men [will] stick to him, if he declares for a free
Parliament. Chillington was sent yesterday to him with the vote of
pardon and indemnity from the Parliament. From the Hall I came home,
where I found letters from Hinchinbroke

     [Hinchinbroke was Sir Edward Montagu’s seat, from which he
     afterwards took his second title.  Hinchinbroke House, so often
     mentioned in the Diary, stood about half a mile to the westward of
     the town of Huntingdon.  It was erected late in the reign of
     Elizabeth, by Sir Henry Cromwell, on the site of a Benedictine
     nunnery, granted at the Dissolution, with all its appurtenances, to
     his father, Richard Williams, who had assumed the name of Cromwell,
     and whose grandson, Sir Oliver, was the uncle and godfather of the
     Protector.  The knight, who was renowned for, his hospitality, had
     the honour of entertaining King James at Hinchinbroke, but, getting
     into pecuniary difficulties, was obliged to sell his estates, which
     were conveyed, July 28th, 1627, to Sir Sidney Montagu of Barnwell,
     father of the first Earl of Sandwich, in whose descendant they are
     still vested.  On the morning of the 22nd January, 1830, during the
     minority of the seventh Earl, Hinchinbroke was almost entirely
     destroyed by fire, but the pictures and furniture were mostly saved,
     and the house has been rebuilt in the Elizabethan style, and the
     interior greatly improved, under the direction of Edward Blore,
     Esq., R.A.--B.]

and news of Mr. Sheply’s going thither the next week. I dined at home,
and from thence went to Will’s to Shaw, who promised me to go along with
me to Atkinson’s about some money, but I found him at cards with Spicer
and D. Vines, and could not get him along with me. I was vext at this,
and went and walked in the Hall, where I heard that the Parliament spent
this day in fasting and prayer; and in the afternoon came letters from
the North, that brought certain news that my Lord Lambent his forces
were all forsaking him, and that he was left with only fifty horse, and
that he did now declare for the Parliament himself; and that my Lord
Fairfax did also rest satisfied, and had laid down his arms, and that
what he had done was only to secure the country against my Lord Lambert
his raising of money, and free quarter. I went to Will’s again, where
I found them still at cards, and Spicer had won 14s. of Shaw and Vines.
Then I spent a little time with G. Vines and Maylard at Vines’s at our
viols.

     [It was usual to have a “chest of viols,” which consisted of six,
     viz., two trebles, two tenors, and two basses (see note in North’s
     “Memoirs of Musick,” ed.  Rimbault, p. 70).  The bass viol was also
     called the ‘viola da gamba’, because it was held between the legs.]

So home, and from thence to Mr. Hunt’s, and sat with them and Mr. Hawly
at cards till ten at night, and was much made of by them. Home and so to
bed, but much troubled with my nose, which was much swelled.

5th. I went to my office, where the money was again expected from
the Excise office, but none brought, but was promised to be sent this
afternoon. I dined with Mr. Sheply, at my Lord’s lodgings, upon his
turkey-pie. And so to my office again; where the Excise money was
brought, and some of it told to soldiers till it was dark. Then I went
home, and after writing a letter to my Lord and told him the news
that the Parliament hath this night voted that the members that were
discharged from sitting in the years 1648 and 49, were duly discharged;
and that there should be writs issued presently for the calling of
others in their places, and that Monk and Fairfax were commanded up to
town, and that the Prince’s lodgings were to be provided for Monk at
Whitehall. Then my wife and I, it being a great frost, went to Mrs.
Jem’s, in expectation to eat a sack-posset, but Mr. Edward--[Edward
Montage, son of Sir Edward, and afterwards Lord Hinchinbroke.]--not
coming it was put off; and so I left my wife playing at cards with her,
and went myself with my lanthorn to Mr. Fage, to consult concerning
my nose, who told me it was nothing but cold, and after that we did
discourse concerning public business; and he told me it is true the City
had not time enough to do much, but they are resolved to shake off the
soldiers; and that unless there be a free Parliament chosen, he did
believe there are half the Common Council will not levy any money by
order of this Parliament. From thence I went to my father’s, where I
found Mrs. Ramsey and her grandchild, a pretty girl, and staid a while
and talked with them and my mother, and then took my leave, only
heard of an invitation to go to dinner to-morrow to my cosen Thomas
Pepys.--[Thomas Pepys, probably the son of Thomas Pepys of London (born,
1595), brother of Samuel’s father, John Pepys.]--I went back to Mrs.
Jem, and took my wife and Mrs. Sheply, and went home.

6th. This morning Mr. Sheply and I did eat our breakfast at Mrs.
Harper’s, (my brother John’ being with me,)

     [John Pepys was born in 1641, and his brother Samuel took great
     interest in his welfare, but he did not do any great credit to his
     elder.]

upon a cold turkey-pie and a goose. From thence I went to my office,
where we paid money to the soldiers till one o’clock, at which time
we made an end, and I went home and took my wife and went to my cosen,
Thomas Pepys, and found them just sat down to dinner, which was very
good; only the venison pasty was palpable beef, which was not
handsome. After dinner I took my leave, leaving my wife with my cozen
Stradwick,--[Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of
Ireland, and wife of Thomas Stradwick.]--and went to Westminster to Mr.
Vines, where George and I fiddled a good while, Dick and his wife (who
was lately brought to bed) and her sister being there, but Mr. Hudson
not coming according to his promise, I went away, and calling at my
house on the wench, I took her and the lanthorn with me to my cosen
Stradwick, where, after a good supper, there being there my father,
mother, brothers, and sister, my cosen Scott and his wife, Mr. Drawwater
and his wife, and her brother, Mr. Stradwick, we had a brave cake
brought us, and in the choosing, Pall was Queen and Mr. Stradwick was
King. After that my wife and I bid adieu and came home, it being still a
great frost.

7th. At my office as I was receiving money of the probate of wills, in
came Mrs. Turner, Theoph., Madame Morrice, and Joyce, and after I had
done I took them home to my house and Mr. Hawly came after, and I got a
dish of steaks and a rabbit for them, while they were playing a game or
two at cards. In the middle of our dinner a messenger from Mr. Downing
came to fetch me to him, so leaving Mr. Hawly there, I went and was
forced to stay till night in expectation of the French Embassador, who
at last came, and I had a great deal of good discourse with one of his
gentlemen concerning the reason of the difference between the zeal of
the French and the Spaniard. After he was gone I went home, and found
my friends still at cards, and after that I went along with them to Dr.
Whores (sending my wife to Mrs. Jem’s to a sack-posset), where I
heard some symphony and songs of his own making, performed by Mr. May,
Harding, and Mallard. Afterwards I put my friends into a coach, and went
to Mrs. Jem’s, where I wrote a letter to my Lord by the post, and had my
part of the posset which was saved for me, and so we went home, and put
in at my Lord’s lodgings, where we staid late, eating of part of his
turkey-pie, and reading of Quarles’ Emblems. So home and to bed.

8th (Sunday). In the morning I went to Mr. Gunning’s, where a good
sermon, wherein he showed the life of Christ, and told us good authority
for us to believe that Christ did follow his father’s trade, and was
a carpenter till thirty years of age. From thence to my father’s to
dinner, where I found my wife, who was forced to dine there, we not
having one coal of fire in the house, and it being very hard frosty
weather. In the afternoon my father, he going to a man’s to demand some
money due to my Aunt Bells my wife and I went to Mr. Mossum’s, where a
strange doctor made a very good sermon. From thence sending my wife to
my father’s, I went to Mrs. Turner’s, and staid a little while, and then
to my father’s, where I found Mr. Sheply, and after supper went home
together. Here I heard of the death of Mr. Palmer, and that he was to be
buried at Westminster tomorrow.

9th. For these two or three days I have been much troubled with thoughts
how to get money to pay them that I have borrowed money of, by reason
of my money being in my uncle’s hands. I rose early this morning, and
looked over and corrected my brother John’s speech, which he is to make
the next apposition,--[Declamations at St. Paul’s School, in which
there were opponents and respondents.]--and after that I went towards my
office, and in my way met with W. Simons, Muddiman, and Jack Price, and
went with them to Harper’s and in many sorts of talk I staid till two
of the clock in the afternoon. I found Muddiman a good scholar, an arch
rogue; and owns that though he writes new books for the Parliament,
yet he did declare that he did it only to get money; and did talk very
basely of many of them. Among other things, W. Simons told me how his
uncle Scobel was on Saturday last called to the bar, for entering in
the journal of the House, for the year 1653, these words: “This day his
Excellence the Lord General Cromwell dissolved this House;” which words
the Parliament voted a forgery, and demanded of him how they came to be
entered. He answered that they were his own handwriting, and that he
did it by virtue of his office, and the practice of his predecessor; and
that the intent of the practice was to--let posterity know how such and
such a Parliament was dissolved, whether by the command of the King, or
by their own neglect, as the last House of Lords was; and that to this
end, he had said and writ that it was dissolved by his Excellence the
Lord G[eneral]; and that for the word dissolved, he never at the time
did hear of any other term; and desired pardon if he would not dare
to make a word himself when it was six years after, before they came
themselves to call it an interruption; but they were so little satisfied
with this answer, that they did chuse a committee to report to the
House, whether this crime of Mr. Scobell’s did come within the act of
indemnity or no. Thence I went with Muddiman to the Coffee-House, and
gave 18d. to be entered of the Club. Thence into the Hall, where I
heard for certain that Monk was coming to London, and that Bradshaw’s 2
lodgings were preparing for him. Thence to Mrs. Jem’s, and found her in
bed, and she was afraid that it would prove the small-pox. Thence back
to Westminster Hall, where I heard how Sir H. Vane--[Sir Harry Vane the
younger, an inflexible republican. He was executed in 1662, on a charge
of conspiring the death of Charles I.]--was this day voted out of the
House, and to sit no more there; and that he would retire himself to his
house at Raby, as also all the rest of the nine officers that had their
commissions formerly taken away from them, were commanded to their
farthest houses from London during the pleasure of the Parliament. Here
I met with the Quarter Master of my Lord’s troop, and his clerk Mr.
Jenings, and took them home, and gave them a bottle of wine, and the
remainder of my collar of brawn; and so good night. After that came in
Mr. Hawly, who told me that I was mist this day at my office, and that
to-morrow I must pay all the money that I have, at which I was put to a
great loss how I should get money to make up my cash, and so went to bed
in great trouble.

10th. Went out early, and in my way met with Greatorex,--[Ralph
Greatorex, the well-known mathematical instrument maker of his day. He
is frequently mentioned by Pepys.]--and at an alehouse he showed me the
first sphere of wire that ever he made, and indeed it was very pleasant;
thence to Mr. Crew’s, and borrowed L10, and so to my office, and was
able to pay my money. Thence into the Hall, and meeting the Quarter
Master, Jenings, and Captain Rider, we four went to a cook’s to dinner.
Thence Jenings and I into London (it being through heat of the sun a
great thaw and dirty) to show our bills of return, and coming back drank
a pint of wine at the Star in Cheapside. So to Westminster, overtaking
Captain Okeshott in his silk cloak, whose sword got hold of many people
in walking. Thence to the Coffee-house, where were a great confluence of
gentlemen; viz. Mr. Harrington, Poultny, chairman, Gold, Dr. Petty; &c.,
where admirable discourse till at night. Thence with Doling to Mother
Lams, who told me how this day Scott

     [Thomas Scott, M.P., was made Secretary of State to the Commonwealth
     on the 17th of this same January.  He signed the death warrant of
     Charles I., for which he was executed at Charing Cross, October
     16th, 1660.  He gloried in his offence, and desired to have written
     on his tombstone, “Thomas Scott who adjudged to death the late
     king.”]

was made Intelligencer, and that the rest of the members that were
objected against last night, their business was to be heard this day
se’nnight. Thence I went home and wrote a letter, and went to Harper’s,
and staid there till Tom carried it to the postboy at Whitehall. So home
to bed.

11th. Being at Will’s with Captain Barker, who hath paid me L300 this
morning at my office, in comes my father, and with him I walked, and
leave him at W. Joyce’s, and went myself to Mr. Crew’s, but came too
late to dine, and therefore after a game at shittle-cocks--[The game
of battledore and shuttlecock was formerly much played even in tennis
courts, and was a very violent game.]--with Mr. Walgrave and Mr. Edward,
I returned to my father, and taking him from W. Joyce’s, who was not
abroad himself, we inquired of a porter, and by his direction went to an
alehouse, where after a cup or two we parted. I went towards London, and
in my way went in to see Crowly, who was now grown a very great loon and
very tame. Thence to Mr. Steven’s with a pair of silver snuffers, and
bought a pair of shears to cut silver, and so homeward again. From home
I went to see Mrs. Jem, who was in bed, and now granted to have the
small-pox. Back again, and went to the Coffee-house, but tarried not,
and so home.

12th. I drink my morning at Harper’s with Mr. Sheply and a seaman, and
so to my office, where Captain Holland came to see me, and appointed a
meeting in the afternoon. Then wrote letters to Hinchinbroke and sealed
them at Will’s, and after that went home, and thence to the Half Moon,
where I found the Captain and Mr. Billingsly and Newman, a barber, where
we were very merry, and had the young man that plays so well on the
Welsh harp. Billingsly paid for all. Thence home, and finding my letters
this day not gone by the carrier I new sealed them, but my brother Tom
coming we fell into discourse about my intention to feast the Joyces.
I sent for a bit of meat for him from the cook’s, and forgot to send my
letters this night. So I went to bed, and in discourse broke to my wife
what my thoughts were concerning my design of getting money by, &c.

13th. Coming in the morning to my office, I met with Mr. Fage and took
him to the Swan? He told me how high Haselrigge, and Morly, the last
night began at my Lord Mayor’s to exclaim against the City of London,
saying that they had forfeited their charter. And how the Chamberlain
of the City did take them down, letting them know how much they were
formerly beholding to the City, &c. He also told me that Monk’s letter
that came to them by the sword-bearer was a cunning piece, and that
which they did not much trust to; but they were resolved to make no
more applications to the Parliament, nor to pay any money, unless the
secluded members be brought in, or a free Parliament chosen. Thence
to my office, where nothing to do. So to Will’s with Mr. Pinkney, who
invited me to their feast at his Hall the next Monday. Thence I went
home and took my wife and dined at Mr. Wades, and after that we went and
visited Catan. From thence home again, and my wife was very unwilling to
let me go forth, but with some discontent would go out if I did, and I
going forth towards Whitehall, I saw she followed me, and so I staid and
took her round through Whitehall, and so carried her home angry. Thence
I went to Mrs. Jem, and found her up and merry, and that it did not
prove the small-pox, but only the swine-pox; so I played a game or two
at cards with her. And so to Mr. Vines, where he and I and Mr. Hudson
played half-a-dozen things, there being there Dick’s wife and her
sister. After that I went home and found my wife gone abroad to Mr.
Hunt’s, and came in a little after me.--So to bed.

14th. Nothing to do at our office. Thence into the Hall, and just as I
was going to dinner from Westminster Hall with Mr. Moore (with whom
I had been in the lobby to hear news, and had spoke with Sir Anthony
Ashley Cooper about my Lord’s lodgings) to his house, I met with Captain
Holland, who told me that he hath brought his wife to my house, so I
posted home and got a dish of meat for them. They staid with me all the
afternoon, and went hence in the evening. Then I went with my wife,
and left her at market, and went myself to the Coffee-house, and
heard exceeding good argument against Mr. Harrington’s assertion,
that overbalance of propriety [i.e., property] was the foundation of
government. Home, and wrote to Hinchinbroke, and sent that and my other
letter that missed of going on Thursday last. So to bed.

15th. Having been exceedingly disturbed in the night with the barking
of a dog of one of our neighbours that I could not sleep for an hour
or two, I slept late, and then in the morning took physic, and so staid
within all day. At noon my brother John came to me, and I corrected as
well as I could his Greek speech to say the Apposition, though I believe
he himself was as well able to do it as myself. After that we went to
read in the great Officiale about the blessing of bells in the Church of
Rome. After that my wife and I in pleasant discourse till night, then
I went to supper, and after that to make an end of this week’s notes in
this book, and so to bed. It being a cold day and a great snow my physic
did not work so well as it should have done.

16th. In the morning I went up to Mr. Crew’s, and at his bedside he gave
me direction to go to-morrow with Mr. Edward to Twickenham, and likewise
did talk to me concerning things of state; and expressed his mind how
just it was that the secluded members should come to sit again. I went
from thence, and in my way went into an alehouse and drank my morning
draft with Matthew Andrews and two or three more of his friends,
coachmen. And of one of them I did hire a coach to carry us to-morrow
to Twickenham. From thence to my office, where nothing to do; but Mr.
Downing he came and found me all alone; and did mention to me his going
back into Holland, and did ask me whether I would go or no, but gave me
little encouragement, but bid me consider of it; and asked me whether I
did not think that Mr. Hawly could perform the work of my office alone
or no. I confess I was at a great loss, all the day after, to bethink
myself how to carry this business. At noon, Harry Ethall came to me and
went along with Mr. Maylard by coach as far as Salsbury Court, and there
we set him down, and we went to the Clerks, where we came a little
too late, but in a closet we had a very good dinner by Mr. Pinkny’s
courtesy, and after dinner we had pretty good singing, and one, Hazard,
sung alone after the old fashion, which was very much cried up, but I
did not like it. Thence we went to the Green Dragon, on Lambeth Hill,
both the Mr. Pinkney’s, Smith, Harrison, Morrice, that sang the bass,
Sheply and I, and there we sang of all sorts of things, and I ventured
with good success upon things at first sight, and after that I played on
my flageolet, and staid there till nine o’clock, very merry and drawn
on with one song after another till it came to be so late. After that
Sheply, Harrison and myself, we went towards Westminster on foot, and
at the Golden Lion, near Charing Cross, we went in and drank a pint of
wine, and so parted, and thence home, where I found my wife and maid
a-washing. I staid up till the bell-man came by with his bell just under
my window as I was writing of this very line, and cried, “Past one of
the clock, and a cold, frosty, windy morning.” I then went to bed, and
left my wife and the maid a-washing still.

17th. Early I went to Mr. Crew’s, and having given Mr. Edward money
to give the servants, I took him into the coach that waited for us and
carried him to my house, where the coach waited for me while I and the
child went to Westminster Hall, and bought him some pictures. In the
Hall I met Mr. Woodfine, and took him to Will’s and drank with him.
Thence the child and I to the coach, where my wife was ready, and so
we went towards Twickenham. In our way, at Kensington we understood how
that my Lord Chesterfield had killed another gentleman about half an
hour before, and was fled.

     [Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield, ob. 1713, act. suae
     80.  We learn, from the memoir prefixed to his “Printed
     Correspondence,” that he fought three duels, disarming and wounding
     his first and second antagonists, and killing the third.  The name
     of the unfortunate gentleman who fell on this occasion was Woolly.
     Lord Chesterfield, absconding, went to Breda, where he obtained the
     royal pardon from Charles II.  He acted a busy part in the eventful
     times in which he lived, and was remarkable for his steady adherence
     to the Stuarts.  Lord Chesterfield’s letter to Charles II., and the
     King’s answer granting the royal pardon, occur in the Correspondence
     published by General Sir John Murray, in 1829.

     “Jan. 17th, 1659.  The Earl of Chesterfield and Dr. Woolly’s son of
     Hammersmith, had a quarrel about a mare of eighteen pounds price;
     the quarrel would not be reconciled, insomuch that a challenge
     passed between them.  They fought a duel on the backside of Mr.
     Colby’s house at Kensington, where the Earl and he had several
     passes.  The Earl wounded him in two places, and would fain have
     then ended, but the stubbornness and pride of heart of Mr. Woolly
     would not give over, and the next pass [he] was killed on the spot.
     The Earl fled to Chelsea, and there took water and escaped.  The
     jury found it chance-medley.”--Rugge’s “Diurnal,” Addit  MSS.,
     British Museum.--B.]

We went forward and came about one of the clock to Mr. Fuller’s, but he
was out of town, so we had a dinner there, and I gave the child 40s.
to give to the two ushers. After that we parted and went homewards, it
being market day at Brainford [Brentford]. I set my wife down and went
with the coach to Mr. Crew’s, thinking to have spoke with Mr. Moore
and Mrs. Jem, he having told me the reason of his melancholy was some
unkindness from her after so great expressions of love, and how he had
spoke to her friends and had their consent, and that he would desire
me to take an occasion of speaking with her, but by no means not to
heighten her discontent or distaste whatever it be, but to make it up if
I can. But he being out of doors, I went away and went to see Mrs. Jem,
who was now very well again, and after a game or two at cards, I left
her. So I went to the Coffee Club, and heard very good discourse; it
was in answer to Mr. Harrington’s answer, who said that the state of the
Roman government was not a settled government, and so it was no wonder
that the balance of propriety [i.e., property] was in one hand, and the
command in another, it being therefore always in a posture of war; but
it was carried by ballot, that it was a steady government, though it is
true by the voices it had been carried before that it was an unsteady
government; so to-morrow it is to be proved by the opponents that the
balance lay in one hand, and the government in another. Thence I went
to Westminster, and met Shaw and Washington, who told me how this day
Sydenham

     [Colonel William Sydenham had been an active officer during the
     Civil Wars, on the Parliament side; M.P. for Dorsetshire, Governor
     of Melcombe, and one of the Committee of Safety.  He was the elder
     brother of the celebrated physician of that name.--B.]

was voted out of the House for sitting any more this Parliament, and
that Salloway was voted out likewise and sent to the Tower, during
the pleasure of the House. Home and wrote by the Post, and carried to
Whitehall, and coming back turned in at Harper-’s, where Jack Price was,
and I drank with him and he told me, among other, things, how much the
Protector

     [Richard Cromwell, third son of Oliver Cromwell, born October 4th,
     1626, admitted a member of Lincoln’s Inn, May 27th, 1647, fell into
     debt and devoted himself to hunting and field sports.  His
     succession to his father as Protector was universally accepted at
     first, but the army soon began to murmur because he was not a
     general.  Between the dissensions of various parties he fell, and
     the country was left in a state of anarchy: He went abroad early in
     the summer of 1660, and lived abroad for some years, returning to
     England in 1680.  After his fall he bore the name of John Clarke.
     Died at Cheshunt, July 12th, 1712.]

is altered, though he would seem to bear out his trouble very well, yet
he is scarce able to talk sense with a man; and how he will say that
“Who should a man trust, if he may not trust to a brother and an uncle;”
 and “how much those men have to answer before God Almighty, for their
playing the knave with him as they did.” He told me also, that there
was; L100,000 offered, and would have been taken for his restitution,
had not the Parliament come in as they did again; and that he do believe
that the Protector will live to give a testimony of his valour and
revenge yet before he dies, and that the Protector will say so himself
sometimes. Thence I went home, it being late and my wife in bed.

18th. To my office and from thence to Will’s, and there Mr. Sheply
brought me letters from the carrier and so I went home. After that to
Wilkinson’s, where we had a dinner for Mr. Talbot, Adams, Pinkny and his
son, but his son did not come. Here we were very merry, and while I was
here Mr. Fuller came thither and staid a little, while.

After that we all went to my Lord’s, whither came afterwards Mr.
Harrison, and by chance seeing Mr. Butler--[Mr. Butler is usually styled
by Pepys Mons. l’Impertinent.]--coming by I called him in and so we
sat drinking a bottle of wine till night. At which time Mistress
Ann--[Probably Mrs. (afterwards Lady) Anne Montagu, daughter of Sir
Edward Montagu, and sister to Mrs. Jem.]--came with the key of my Lord’s
study for some things, and so we all broke up and after I had gone to my
house and interpreted my Lord’s letter by his character--[The making of
ciphers was a popular amusement about this time. Pepys made several for
Montagu, Downing, and others.]--I came to her again and went with her to
her lodging and from thence to Mr. Crew’s, where I advised with him
what to do about my Lord’s lodgings and what answer to give to Sir Ant.
Cooper and so I came home and to bed. All the world is at a loss to
think what Monk will do: the City saying that he will be for them, and
the Parliament saying he will be for them.

19th. This morning I was sent for to Mr. Downing, and at his bed side he
told me, that he had a kindness for me, and that he thought that he had
done me one; and that was, that he had got me to be one of the Clerks of
the Council; at which I was a little stumbled, and could not tell what
to do, whether to thank him or no; but by and by I did; but not very
heartily, for I feared that his doing of it was but only to ease himself
of the salary which he gives me. After that Mr. Sheply staying below all
this time for me we went thence and met Mr. Pierce,

     [Pepys had two friends named Pierce, one the surgeon and the other
     the purser; he usually (but not always) distinguishes them.  The one
     here alluded to was probably the surgeon, and husband of pretty Mrs.
     Pierce.  After the Restoration James Pearse or Pierce became Surgeon
     to the Duke of York, and he was also Surgeon-General of the Fleet.]

so at the Harp and Ball drank our morning draft and so to Whitehall
where I met with Sir Ant. Cooper and did give him some answer from my
Lord and he did give us leave to keep the lodgings still. And so we did
determine thereupon that Mr. Sheply might now go into the country and
would do so to-morrow. Back I went by Mr. Downing’s order and staid
there till twelve o’clock in expectation of one to come to read some
writings, but he came not, so I staid all alone reading the answer of
the Dutch Ambassador to our State, in answer to the reasons of my Lord’s
coming home, which he gave for his coming, and did labour herein to
contradict my Lord’s arguments for his coming home. Thence to my office
and so with Mr. Sheply and Moore, to dine upon a turkey with Mrs. Jem,
and after that Mr. Moore and I went to the French Ordinary, where Mr.
Downing this day feasted Sir Arth. Haselrigge, and a great many more of
the Parliament, and did stay to put him in mind of me. Here he gave me
a note to go and invite some other members to dinner tomorrow. So I went
to White Hall, and did stay at Marsh’s, with Simons, Luellin, and all
the rest of the Clerks of the Council, who I hear are all turned out,
only the two Leighs, and they do all tell me that my name was mentioned
the last night, but that nothing was done in it. Hence I went and did
leave some of my notes at the lodgings of the members and so home. To
bed.

20th. In the morning I went to Mr. Downing’s bedside and gave him an
account what I had done as to his guests, land I went thence to my Lord
Widdrington who I met in the street, going to seal the patents for
the judges to-day, and so could not come to dinner. I called upon Mr.
Calthrop about the money due to my Lord. Here I met with Mr. Woodfine
and drank with him at the Sun in Chancery Lane and so to Westminster
Hall, where at the lobby I spoke with the rest of my guests and so to my
office. At noon went by water with Mr. Maylard and Hales to the Swan in
Fish Street at our Goal Feast, where we were very merry at our Jole
of Ling, and from thence after a great and good dinner Mr. Falconberge
would go drink a cup of ale at a place where I had like to have shot
at a scholar that lay over the house of office. Thence calling on Mr.
Stephens and Wootton (with whom I drank) about business of my Lord’s I
went to the Coffee Club where there was nothing done but choosing of a
Committee for orders. Thence to Westminster Hall where Mrs. Lane and the
rest of the maids had their white scarfs, all having been at the burial
of a young bookseller in the Hall.

     [These stationers and booksellers, whose shops disfigured
     Westminster Hall down to a late period, were a privileged class.
     In the statutes for appointing licensers and regulating the press,
     there is a clause exempting them from the pains and penalties of
     these obnoxious laws.]

Thence to Mr. Sheply’s and took him to my house and drank with him in
order to his going to-morrow. So parted and I sat up late making up my
accounts before he go. This day three citizens of London went to meet
Monk from the Common Council!

     “Jan. 20th.  Then there went out of the City, by desire of the Lord
     Mayor and Court of Aldermen, Alderman Fowke and Alderman Vincett,
     alias Vincent, and Mr. Broomfield, to compliment General Monk, who
     lay at Harborough Town, in Leicestershire.”

     “Jan. 21st.  Because the Speaker was sick, and Lord General Monk so
     near London, and everybody thought that the City would suffer for
     their affronts to the soldiery, and because they had sent the sword-
     bearer to, the General without the Parliament’s consent, and the
     three Aldermen were gone to give him the welcome to town, these four
     lines were in almost everybody’s mouth:

                   “Monk under a hood, not well understood,
                    The City pull in their horns;
                    The Speaker is out, and sick of the gout,
                    And the Parliament sit upon thorns.”
                     --Rugge’s ‘Diurnal.’--B.”

21st. Up early in finishing my accounts and writing to my Lord and from
thence to my Lord’s and took leave of Mr. Sheply and possession of all
the keys and the house. Thence to my office for some money to pay Mr.
Sheply and sent it him by the old man. I then went to Mr. Downing who
chid me because I did not give him notice of some of his guests failed
him but I told him that I sent our porter to tell him and he was not
within, but he told me that he was within till past twelve o’clock. So
the porter or he lied. Thence to my office where nothing to do. Then
with Mr. Hawly, he and I went to Mr. Crew’s and dined there. Thence
into London, to Mr. Vernon’s and I received my L25 due by bill for my
troopers’ pay. Then back again to Steadman’s. At the Mitre, in Fleet
street, in our way calling on Mr. Fage, who told me how the City have
some hopes of Monk. Thence to the Mitre, where I drank a pint of wine,
the house being in fitting for Banister to come hither from Paget’s.
Thence to Mrs. Jem and gave her L5. So home and left my money and to
Whitehall where Luellin and I drank and talked together an hour at
Marsh’s and so up to the clerks’ room, where poor Mr. Cook, a black man,
that is like to be put out of his clerk’s place, came and railed at me
for endeavouring to put him out and get myself in, when I was already
in a good condition. But I satisfied him and after I had wrote a letter
there to my Lord, wherein I gave him an account how this day Lenthall
took his chair again, and [the House] resolved a declaration to be
brought in on Monday next to satisfy the world what they intend to do.
So home and to bed.

22nd. I went in the morning to Mr. Messum’s, where I met with W.
Thurburn and sat with him in his pew. A very eloquent sermon about the
duty of all to give good example in our lives and conversation, which I
fear he himself was most guilty of not doing. After sermon, at the door
by appointment my wife met me, and so to my father’s to dinner, where we
had not been to my shame in a fortnight before. After dinner my father
shewed me a letter from Mr. Widdrington, of Christ’s College, in
Cambridge, wherein he do express very great kindness for my brother,
and my father intends that my brother shall go to him. To church in the
afternoon to Mr. Herring, where a lazy poor sermon. And so home with
Mrs. Turner and sitting with her a while we went to my father’s where we
supt very merry, and so home. This day I began to put on buckles to my
shoes, which I have bought yesterday of Mr. Wotton.

23rd. In the morning called out to carry L20 to Mr. Downing, which I did
and came back, and finding Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, I took him to the
Axe and gave him his morning draft. Thence to my office and there did
nothing but make up my balance. Came home and found my wife dressing of
the girl’s head, by which she was made to look very pretty. I went out
and paid Wilkinson what I did owe him, and brought a piece of beef home
for dinner. Thence I went out and paid Waters, the vintner, and went to
see Mrs. Jem, where I found my Lady Wright, but Scott was so drunk that
he could not be seen. Here I staid and made up Mrs. Ann’s bills, and
played a game or two at cards, and thence to Westminster Hall, it being
very dark. I paid Mrs. Michell, my bookseller, and back to Whitehall,
and in the garden, going through to the Stone Gallery--[The Stone
Gallery was a long passage between the Privy Garden and the river. It
led from the Bowling Green to the Court of the Palace]--I fell into a
ditch, it being very dark. At the Clerk’s chamber I met with Simons
and Luellin, and went with them to Mr. Mount’s chamber at the Cock Pit,
where we had some rare pot venison, and ale to abundance till almost
twelve at night, and after a song round we went home. This day the
Parliament sat late, and resolved of the declaration to be printed for
the people’s satisfaction, promising them a great many good things.

24th. In the morning to my office, where, after I had drank my morning
draft at Will’s with Ethell and Mr. Stevens, I went and told part of the
excise money till twelve o’clock, and then called on my wife and took
her to Mr. Pierces, she in the way being exceedingly troubled with a
pair of new pattens, and I vexed to go so slow, it being late. There
when we came we found Mrs. Carrick very fine, and one Mr. Lucy, who
called one another husband and wife, and after dinner a great deal
of mad stir. There was pulling off Mrs. bride’s and Mr. bridegroom’s
ribbons;

     [The scramble for ribbons, here mentioned by Pepys in connection
     with weddings (see also January 26th, 1660-61, and February 8th,
     1662-3), doubtless formed part of the ceremony of undressing the
     bridegroom, which, as the age became more refined, fell into disuse.
     All the old plays are silent on the custom; the earliest notice of
     which occurs in the old ballad of the wedding of Arthur O’Bradley,
     printed in the Appendix to “Robin Hood,” 1795, where we read--

                   “Then got they his points and his garters,
                    And cut them in pieces like martyrs;
                    And then they all did play
                    For the honour of Arthur O’Bradley.”

     Sir Winston Churchill also observes (“Divi Britannici,” p. 340) that
     James I. was no more troubled at his querulous countrymen robbing
     him than a bridegroom at the losing of his points and garters.  Lady
     Fanshawe, in her “Memoirs,” says, that at the nuptials of Charles
     II. and the Infanta, “the Bishop of London declared them married in
     the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and then they
     caused the ribbons her Majesty wore to be cut in little pieces; and
     as far as they would go, every one had some.”  The practice still
     survives in the form of wedding favours.

     A similar custom is still of every day’s occurrence at Dieppe.  Upon
     the morrow after their marriage, the bride and bridegroom
     perambulate the streets, followed by a numerous cortege, the guests
     at the wedding festival, two and two; each individual wearing two
     bits of narrow ribbon, about two inches in length, of different
     colours, which are pinned crossways upon the breast.  These morsels
     of ribbons originally formed the garters of the bride and
     bridegroom, which had been divided amidst boisterous mirth among the
     assembled company, the moment the happy pair had been formally
     installed in the bridal bed.--Ex. inf.  Mr. William.Hughes,
     Belvedere, Jersey.--B.]

with a great deal of fooling among them that I and my wife did not like.
Mr. Lucy and several other gentlemen coming in after dinner, swearing
and singing as if they were mad, only he singing very handsomely. There
came in afterwards Mr. Southerne, clerk to Mr. Blackburne, and with
him Lambert, lieutenant of my Lord’s ship, and brought with them the
declaration that came out to-day from the Parliament, wherein they
declare for law and gospel, and for tythes; but I do not find people apt
to believe them. After this taking leave I went to my father’s, and
my wife staying there, he and I went to speak with Mr. Crumlum (in the
meantime, while it was five o’clock, he being in the school, we went
to my cozen Tom Pepys’ shop, the turner in Paul’s Churchyard, and drank
with him a pot of ale); he gave my father directions what to do about
getting my brother an exhibition, and spoke very well of my brother.
Thence back with my father home, where he and I spoke privately in the
little room to my sister Pall about stealing of things as my wife’s
scissars and my maid’s book, at which my father was much troubled. Hence
home with my wife and so to Whitehall, where I met with Mr. Hunt and
Luellin, and drank with them at Marsh’s, and afterwards went up and
wrote to my Lord by the post. This day the Parliament gave order that
the late Committee of Safety should come before them this day se’nnight,
and all their papers, and their model of Government that they had made,
to be brought in with them. So home and talked with my wife about our
dinner on Thursday.

25th. Called up early to Mr. Downing; he gave me a Character, such a one
as my Lord’s, to make perfect, and likewise gave me his order for L500
to carry to Mr. Frost, which I did and so to my office, where I did do
something about the character till twelve o’clock. Then home find
found my wife and the maid at my Lord’s getting things ready against
to-morrow. I went by water to my Uncle White’s’ to dinner, where I
met my father, where we alone had a fine jole of Ling to dinner. After
dinner I took leave, and coming home heard that in Cheapside there had
been but a little before a gibbet set up, and the picture of Huson

     [John Hewson, who, from a low origin, became a colonel in the
     Parliament army, and sat in judgment on the King: he escaped hanging
     by flight, and died in 1662, at Amsterdam.  A curious notice of
     Hewson occurs in Rugge’s “Diurnal,” December 5th, 1659, which states
     that “he was a cobbler by trade, but a very stout man, and a very
     good commander; but in regard of his former employment, they [the
     city apprentices] threw at him old shoes, and slippers, and
     turniptops, and brick-bats, stones, and tiles.”...  “At this
     time [January, 1659-60] there came forth, almost every day, jeering
     books: one was called ‘Colonel Hewson’s Confession; or, a Parley
     with Pluto,’ about his going into London, and taking down the gates
     of Temple-Bar.”  He had but one eye, which did not escape the notice
     of his enemies.--B.]

hung upon it in the middle of the street. I called at Paul’s Churchyard,
where I bought Buxtorf’s Hebrew Grammar; and read a declaration of the
gentlemen of Northampton which came out this afternoon. Thence to my
father’s, where I staid with my mother a while and then to Mr. Crew’s
about a picture to be sent into the country, of Mr. Thomas Crew, to my
Lord. So [to] my Lady Wright to speak with her, but she was abroad, so
Mr. Evans, her butler, had me into his buttery, and gave me sack and
a lesson on his lute, which he played very well. Thence I went to my
Lord’s and got most things ready against tomorrow, as fires and laying
the cloth, and my wife was making of her tarts and larding of her
pullets till eleven o’clock. This evening Mr. Downing sent for me, and
gave me order to go to Mr. Jessop for his papers concerning his dispatch
to Holland which were not ready, only his order for a ship to transport
him he gave me. To my Lord’s again and so home with my wife, tired with
this day’s work.

26th. To my office for L20 to carry to Mr. Downing, which I did and back
again. Then came Mr. Frost to pay Mr. Downing his L500, and I went to
him for the warrant and brought it Mr. Frost. Called for some papers at
Whitehall for Mr. Downing, one of which was an Order of the Council for
L1800 per annum, to be paid monthly; and the other two, Orders to the
Commissioners of Customs, to let his goods pass free. Home from my
office to my Lord’s lodgings where my wife had got ready a very fine
dinner--viz. a dish of marrow bones; a leg of mutton; a loin of veal;
a dish of fowl, three pullets, and two dozen of larks all in a dish; a
great tart, a neat’s tongue, a dish of anchovies; a dish of prawns and
cheese. My company was my father, my uncle Fenner, his two sons, Mr.
Pierce, and all their wives, and my brother Tom. We were as merry as I
could frame myself to be in the company, W. Joyce talking after the old
rate and drinking hard, vexed his father and mother and wife. And I did
perceive that Mrs. Pierce her coming so gallant, that it put the two
young women quite out of courage. When it became dark they all went
away but Mr. Pierce, and W. Joyce, and their wives and Tom, and drank a
bottle of wine afterwards, so that Will did heartily vex his father and
mother by staying. At which I and my wife were much pleased. Then they
all went and I fell to writing of two characters for Mr. Downing, and
carried them to him at nine o’clock at night, and he did not like them
but corrected them, so that to-morrow I am to do them anew. To my Lord’s
lodging again and sat by the great log, it being now a very good fire,
with my wife, and ate a bit and so home. The news this day is a letter
that speaks absolutely Monk’s concurrence with this Parliament, and
nothing else, which yet I hardly believe. After dinner to-day my
father showed me a letter from my Uncle Robert, in answer to my last,
concerning my money which I would have out of my Coz. Beck’s’ hand,
wherein Beck desires it four months longer, which I know not how to
spare.

27th. Going to my office I met with Tom Newton, my old comrade, and took
him to the Crown in the Palace, and gave him his morning draft. And as
he always did, did talk very high what he would do with the Parliament,
that he would have what place he would, and that he might be one of the
Clerks to the Council if he would. Here I staid talking with him till
the offices were all shut, and then I looked in the Hall, and was told
by my bookseller, Mrs. Michell, that Mr. G. Montagu had inquired there
for me. So I went to his house, and was forced by him to dine with him,
and had a plenteous brave dinner and the greatest civility that ever I
had from any man. Thence home and so to Mrs. Jem, and played with her
at cards, and coming home again my wife told me that Mr. Hawly had been
there to speak with me, and seemed angry that I had not been at the
office that day, and she told me she was afraid that Mr. Downing may
have a mind to pick some hole in my coat. So I made haste to him, but
found no such thing from him, but he sent me to Mr. Sherwin’s about
getting Mr. Squib to come to him tomorrow, and I carried him an answer.
So home and fell a writing the characters for Mr. Downing, and about
nine at night Mr. Hawly came, and after he was gone I sat up till almost
twelve writing, and--wrote two of them. In the morning up early and
wrote another, my wife lying in bed and reading to me.

28th. I went to Mr. Downing and carried him three characters, and then
to my office and wrote another, while Mr. Frost staid telling money. And
after I had done it Mr. Hawly came into the office and I left him and
carried it to Mr. Downing, who then told me that he was resolved to be
gone for Holland this morning. So I to my office again, and dispatch my
business there, and came with Mr. Hawly to Mr. Downing’s lodging, and
took Mr. Squib from White Hall in a coach thither with me, and there we
waited in his chamber a great while, till he came in; and in the mean
time, sent all his things to the barge that lay at Charing-Cross
Stairs. Then came he in, and took a very civil leave of me, beyond my
expectation, for I was afraid that he would have told me something of
removing me from my office; but he did not, but that he would do me any
service that lay in his power. So I went down and sent a porter to my
house for my best fur cap, but he coming too late with it I did not
present it to him. Thence I went to Westminster Hall, and bound up my
cap at Mrs. Michell’s, who was much taken with my cap, and endeavoured
to overtake the coach at the Exchange and to give it him there, but I
met with one that told me that he was gone, and so I returned and went
to Heaven,

     [A place of entertainment within or adjoining Westminster Hall.  It
     is called in “Hudibras,” “False Heaven, at the end of the Hall.”
      There were two other alehouses near Westminster Hall, called Hell
     and Purgatory.

                   “Nor break his fast
                    In Heaven and Hell.”

                              Ben Jonson’s Alchemist, act v.  SC. 2.]

where Luellin and I dined on a breast of mutton all alone, discoursing
of the changes that we have seen and the happiness of them that have
estates of their own, and so parted, and I went by appointment to my
office and paid young Mr. Walton L500; it being very dark he took L300
by content. He gave me half a piece and carried me in his coach to
St. Clement’s, from whence I went to Mr. Crew’s and made even with Mr.
Andrews, and took in all my notes and gave him one for all. Then to
my Lady Wright and gave her my Lord’s letter which he bade me give her
privately. So home and then to Will’s for a little news, then came home
again and wrote to my Lord, and so to Whitehall and gave them to the
post-boy. Back again home and to bed.

29th. In the morning I went to Mr. Gunning’s, where he made an excellent
sermon upon the 2d of the Galatians, about the difference that fell
between St. Paul and St. Peter (the feast day of St. Paul being a day
or two ago), whereby he did prove, that, contrary to the doctrine of
the Roman Church, St. Paul did never own any dependance, or that he was
inferior to St. Peter, but that they were equal, only one a particular
charge of preaching to the Jews, and the other to the Gentiles. Here
I met with Mr. Moore, and went home with him to dinner to Mr. Crew’s,
where Mr. Spurrier being in town did dine with us. From thence I went
home and spent the afternoon in casting up my accounts, and do find
myself to be worth L40 and more, which I did not think, but am afraid
that I have forgot something. To my father’s to supper, where I heard by
my brother Tom how W. Joyce would the other day have Mr. Pierce and his
wife to the tavern after they were gone from my house, and that he had
so little manners as to make Tom pay his share notwithstanding that
he went upon his account, and by my father I understand that my uncle
Fenner and my aunt were much pleased with our entertaining them. After
supper home without going to see Mrs. Turner.

30th. This morning, before I was up, I fell a-singing of my song,
“Great, good, and just,” &c.

     [This is the beginning of the Marquis of Montrose’s verses on the
     execution of Charles I., which Pepys had set to music:

         “Great, good, and just, could I but rate
          My grief and thy too rigid fate,
          I’d weep the world to such a strain
          That it should deluge once again.
          But since thy loud-tongued blood demands supplies
          More from Briareus’ hands, than Argus eyes,
          I’ll sing thy obsequies with trumpet sounds,
          And write thy epitaph with blood and wounds.”]

and put myself thereby in mind that this was the fatal day, now ten
years since, his Majesty died. Scull the waterman came and brought me
a note from the Hope from Mr. Hawly with direction, about his money, he
tarrying there till his master be gone. To my office, where I received
money of the excise of Mr. Ruddyer, and after we had done went to Will’s
and staid there till 3 o’clock and then I taking my L12 10s. 0d. due to
me for my last quarter’s salary, I went with them by water to London to
the house where Signr. Torriano used to be and staid there a while with
Mr. Ashwell, Spicer and Ruddier. Then I went and paid L12 17s. 6d. due
from me to Captn. Dick Matthews according to his direction the last week
in a letter. After that I came back by water playing on my flageolette
and not finding my wife come home again from her father’s I went and sat
awhile and played at cards with Mrs. Jam, whose maid had newly got an
ague and was ill thereupon. So homewards again, having great need to
do my business, and so pretending to meet Mr. Shott the wood monger of
Whitehall I went and eased myself at the Harp and Ball, and thence home
where I sat writing till bed-time and so to bed. There seems now to be
a general cease of talk, it being taken for granted that Monk do resolve
to stand to the Parliament, and nothing else. Spent a little time this
night in knocking up nails for my hat and cloaks in my chamber.

31st. In the morning I fell to my lute till 9 o’clock. Then to my Lord’s
lodgings and set out a barrel of soap to be carried to Mrs. Ann. Here I
met with Nick Bartlet, one that had been a servant of my Lord’s at sea
and at Harper’s gave him his morning draft. So to my office where I
paid; L1200 to Mr. Frost and at noon went to Will’s to give one of the
Excise office a pot of ale that came to-day to tell over a bag of his
that wanted; L7 in it, which he found over in another bag. Then home and
dined with my wife when in came Mr. Hawly newly come from shipboard
from his master, and brought me a letter of direction what to do in
his lawsuit with Squib about his house and office. After dinner to
Westminster Hall, where all we clerks had orders to wait upon the
Committee, at the Star Chamber that is to try Colonel Jones,

     [Colonel John Jones, impeached, with General Ludlow and Miles
     Corbet, for treasonable practices in Ireland.]

and were to give an account what money we had paid him; but the
Committee did not sit to-day. Hence to Will’s, where I sat an hour or
two with Mr. Godfrey Austin, a scrivener in King Street. Here I met and
afterwards bought the answer to General Monk’s letter, which is a very
good one, and I keep it by me. Thence to Mrs. Jem, where I found her
maid in bed in a fit of the ague, and Mrs. Jem among the people below at
work and by and by she came up hot and merry, as if they had given her
wine, at which I was troubled, but said nothing; after a game at cards,
I went home and wrote by the post and coming back called in at Harper’s
and drank with Mr. Pulford, servant to Mr. Waterhouse, who tells me,
that whereas my Lord Fleetwood should have answered to the Parliament
to-day, he wrote a letter and desired a little more time, he being a
great way out of town. And how that he is quite ashamed of himself, and
confesses how he had deserved this, for his baseness to his brother.
And that he is like to pay part of the money, paid out of the Exchequer
during the Committee of Safety, out of his own purse again, which I am
glad of. Home and to bed, leaving my wife reading in Polixandre.

     [“Polexandre,” by Louis Le Roy de Gomberville, was first published
     in 1632.  “The History of Polexander” was “done into English by W.
     Browne,” and published in folio, London, 1647.  It was the earliest
     of the French heroic romances, and it appears to have been the model
     for the works of Calprenede and Mdlle. de Scuderi; see Dunlop’s
     “History of Fiction” for the plot of the romance.]

I could find nothing in Mr. Downing’s letter, which Hawly brought me,
concerning my office; but I could discern that Hawly had a mind that I
would get to be Clerk of the Council, I suppose that he might have the
greater salary; but I think it not safe yet to change this for a public
employment.




FEBRUARY 1659-1660

February 1st. In the morning went to my office where afterwards the
old man brought me my letters from the carrier. At noon I went home and
dined with my wife on pease porridge and nothing else. After that I
went to the Hall and there met with Mr. Swan and went with him to Mr.
Downing’s Counsellor, who did put me in very little hopes about the
business between Mr. Downing and Squib, and told me that Squib would
carry it against him, at which I was much troubled, and with him went
to Lincoln’s Inn and there spoke with his attorney, who told me the
day that was appointed for the trial. From thence I went to Sir
Harry Wright’s and got him to give me his hand for the L60 which I am
to-morrow to receive from Mr. Calthrop and from thence to Mrs. Jem and
spoke with Madam Scott and her husband who did promise to have the thing
for her neck done this week. Thence home and took Gammer East, and James
the porter, a soldier, to my Lord’s lodgings, who told me how they were
drawn into the field to-day, and that they were ordered to march away
to-morrow to make room for General Monk; but they did shut their Colonel
Fitch, and the rest of the officers out of the field, and swore they
would not go without their money, and if they would not give it them,
they would go where they might have it, and that was the City. So the
Colonel went to the Parliament, and commanded what money could be got,
to be got against to-morrow for them, and all the rest of the soldiers
in town, who in all places made a mutiny this day, and do agree
together. Here I took some bedding to send to Mrs. Ann for her to lie
in now she hath her fits of the ague. Thence I went to Will’s and staid
like a fool there and played at cards till 9 o’clock and so came home,
where I found Mr. Hunt and his wife who staid and sat with me till 10
and so good night.

2d. Drank at Harper’s with Doling, and so to my office, where I found
all the officers of the regiments in town, waiting to receive money that
their soldiers might go out of town, and what was in the Exchequer they
had. At noon after dining at home I called at Harper’s for Doling, and
he and I met with Luellin and drank with him at the Exchequer at Charing
Cross, and thence he and I went to the Temple to Mr. Calthrop’s chamber,
and from thence had his man by water to London Bridge to Mr. Calthrop,
a grocer, and received L60 for my Lord. In our way we talked with our
waterman, White, who told us how the watermen had lately been abused by
some that had a desire to get in to be watermen to the State, and had
lately presented an address of nine or ten thousand hands to stand by
this Parliament, when it was only told them that it was to a petition
against hackney coaches; and that to-day they had put out another to
undeceive the world and to clear themselves, and that among the rest
Cropp, my waterman and one of great practice, was one that did cheat
them thus. After I had received the money we went to the Bridge Tavern
and drank a quart of wine and so back by water, landing Mr. Calthrop’s
man at the Temple and we went homewards, but over against Somerset
House, hearing the noise of guns, we landed and found the Strand full
of soldiers. So I took my money and went to Mrs. Johnson, my Lord’s
sempstress, and giving her my money to lay up, Doling and I went up
stairs to a window, and looked out and see the foot face the horse and
beat them back, and stood bawling and calling in the street for a free
Parliament and money. By and by a drum was heard to beat a march coming
towards them, and they got all ready again and faced them, and they
proved to be of the same mind with them; and so they made a great deal
of joy to see one another. After all this, I took my money, and went
home on foot and laying up my money, and changing my stockings and
shoes, I this day having left off my great skirt suit, and put on my
white suit with silver lace coat, and went over to Harper’s, where I met
with W. Simons, Doling, Luellin and three merchants, one of which had
occasion to use a porter, so they sent for one, and James the soldier
came, who told us how they had been all day and night upon their guard
at St. James’s, and that through the whole town they did resolve to
stand to what they had began, and that to-morrow he did believe they
would go into the City, and be received there. After all this we went to
a sport called, selling of a horse for a dish of eggs and herrings, and
sat talking there till almost twelve o’clock and then parted, they were
to go as far as Aldgate. Home and to bed.

3rd. Drank my morning draft at Harper’s, and was told there that the
soldiers were all quiet upon promise of pay. Thence to St. James’s Park,
and walked there to my place for my flageolet and then played a little,
it being a most pleasant morning and sunshine. Back to Whitehall, where
in the guard-chamber I saw about thirty or forty ‘prentices of the
City, who were taken at twelve o’clock last night and brought prisoners
hither. Thence to my office, where I paid a little more money to some
of the soldiers under Lieut.-Col. Miller (who held out the Tower against
the Parliament after it was taken away from Fitch by the Committee of
Safety, and yet he continued in his office). About noon Mrs. Turner came
to speak with me, and Joyce, and I took them and shewed them the manner
of the Houses sitting, the doorkeeper very civilly opening the door for
us. Thence with my cozen Roger Pepys,

     [Roger Pepys, son of Talbot Pepys of Impington, a barrister of the
     Middle Temple, M.P.  for Cambridge, 1661-78, and Recorder of that
     town, 1660-88.  He married, for the third time, Parnell, daughter
     and heiress of John Duke, of Workingham, co.  Suffolk, and this was
     the wedding for which the posy ring was required.]

it being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors, the Rhenish
wine-house, and there had a pint or two of wine and a dish of anchovies,
and bespoke three or four dozen bottles of wine for him against his
wedding. After this done he went away, and left me order to call and
pay for all that Mrs. Turner would have. So we called for nothing more
there, but went and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinson’s to be
roasted as well as it could be done, and sent a bottle of wine home
to my house. In the meantime she and I and Joyce went walking all over
White Hall, whither General Monk was newly come, and we saw all his
forces march by in very good plight and stout officers. Thence to my
house where we dined, but with a great deal of patience, for the mutton
came in raw, and so we were fain to stay the stewing of it. In the
meantime we sat studying a Posy

     [It is supposed that the fashion of having mottoes inscribed on
     rings was of Roman origin.  In the fourteenth and fifteenth
     centuries the posy was inscribed on the outside of the ring, and in
     the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was placed inside.  A
     small volume was published in 1674, entitled “Love’s Garland: or
     Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and Gloves, and such pretty tokens
     that Lovers send their Loves.”]

for a ring for her which she is to have at Roger Pepys his wedding.
After dinner I left them and went to hear news, but only found that the
Parliament House was most of them with Monk at White Hall, and that
in his passing through the town he had many calls to him for a free
Parliament, but little other welcome. I saw in the Palace Yard how
unwilling some of the old soldiers were yet to go out of town without
their money, and swore if they had it not in three days, as they were
promised, they would do them more mischief in the country than if
they had staid here; and that is very likely, the country being all
discontented. The town and guards are already full of Monk’s soldiers.
I returned, and it growing dark I and they went to take a turn in the
park, where Theoph. (who was sent for to us to dinner) outran my wife
and another poor woman, that laid a pot of ale with me that she would
outrun her. After that I set them as far as Charing Cross, and there
left them and my wife, and I went to see Mrs. Ann, who began very high
about a flock bed I sent her, but I took her down. Here I played at
cards till 9 o’clock. So home and to bed.

4th. In the morning at my lute an hour, and so to my office, where I
staid expecting to have Mr. Squib come to me, but he did not. At noon
walking in the Hall I found Mr. Swan and got him and Captain Stone
together, and there advised about Mr. Downing’s business. So to Will’s,
and sat there till three o’clock and then to Mr. Swan’s, where I found
his wife in very genteel mourning for her father, and took him out by
water to the Counsellor at the Temple, Mr. Stephens, and from thence to
Gray’s Inn, thinking to speak with Sotherton Ellis, but found him not,
so we met with an acquaintance of his in the walks, and went and drank,
where I ate some bread and butter, having ate nothing all day, while
they were by chance discoursing of Marriot, the great eater, so that I
was, I remember, ashamed to eat what I would have done. Here Swan shewed
us a ballad to the tune of Mardike which was most incomparably wrote in
a printed hand, which I borrowed of him, but the song proved but silly,
and so I did not write it out. Thence we went and leaving Swan at his
master’s, my Lord Widdrington, I met with Spicer, Washington, and D.
Vines in Lincoln’s Inn Court, and they were buying of a hanging jack to
roast birds on of a fellow that was there selling of some. I was fain to
slip from there and went to Mrs. Crew’s to her and advised about a maid
to come and be with Mrs. Jem while her maid is sick, but she could spare
none. Thence to Sir Harry Wright’s, but my lady not being within I spoke
to Mrs. Carter about it, who will get one against Monday. So with a link
boy

     [Links were torches of tow or pitch to light the way.  Ed.]

to Scott’s, where Mrs. Ann was in a heat, but I spoke not to her,
but told Mrs. Jem what I had done, and after that went home and wrote
letters into the country by the post, and then played awhile on my lute,
and so done, to supper and then to bed. All the news to-day is, that
the Parliament this morning voted the House to be made up four hundred
forthwith. This day my wife killed her turkeys that Mr. Sheply gave her,
that came out of Zealand with my Lord, and could not get her m’d Jane by
no means at any time to kill anything.

5th,(Lord’s day). In the morning before church time Mr. Hawly, who had
for this day or two looked something sadly, which methinks did speak
something in his breast concerning me, came to me telling me that he
was out L24 which he could not tell what was become of, and that he do
remember that he had such a sum in a bag the other day, and could not
tell what he did with it, at which I was very sorry but could not
help him. In the morning to Mr. Gunning, where a stranger, an old man,
preached a good honest sermon upon “What manner of love is this that
we should be called the sons of God.” After sermon I could not find my
wife, who promised to be at the gate against my coming out, and waited
there a great while; then went to my house and finding her gone I
returned and called at the Chequers, thinking to dine at the ordinary
with Mr. Chetwind and Mr. Thomas, but they not being there I went to my
father and found her there, and there I dined. To their church in the
afternoon, and in Mrs. Turner’s pew my wife took up a good black hood
and kept it. A stranger preached a poor sermon, and so read over the
whole book of the story of Tobit. After sermon home with Mrs. Turner,
staid with her a little while, then she went into the court to a
christening and we to my father’s, where I wrote some notes for my
brother John to give to the Mercers’ to-morrow, it being the day of
their apposition. After supper home, and before going to bed I staid
writing of this day its passages, while a drum came by, beating of a
strange manner of beat, now and then a single stroke, which my wife
and I wondered at, what the meaning of it should be. This afternoon
at church I saw Dick Cumberland newly come out of the country from his
living, but did not speak to him.

6th. Before I went to my office I went to Mr. Crew’s and paid Mr.
Andrews the same L60 that he had received of Mr. Calthrop the last week.
So back to Westminster and walked with him thither, where we found the
soldiers all set in the Palace Yard, to make way for General Monk to
come to the House. At the Hall we parted, and meeting Swan, he and I to
the Swan and drank our morning draft. So back again to the Hall, where
I stood upon the steps and saw Monk go by, he making observance to the
judges as he went along. At noon my father dined with me upon my turkey
that was brought from Denmark, and after dinner he and I to the Bull
Head Tavern, where we drank half a pint of wine and so parted. I to Mrs.
Ann, and Mrs. Jem being gone out of the chamber she and I had a very
high bout, I rattled her up, she being in her bed, but she becoming more
cool, we parted pretty good friends. Thence I went to Will’s, where I
staid at cards till 10 o’clock, losing half a crown, and so home to bed.

7th. In the morning I went early to give Mr. Hawly notice of my being
forced to go into London, but he having also business we left our office
business to Mr. Spicer and he and I walked as far as the Temple, where
I halted a little and then went to Paul’s School, but it being too soon,
went and drank my morning draft with my cozen Tom Pepys the turner, and
saw his house and shop, thence to school, where he that made the speech
for the seventh form in praise of the founder, did show a book which
Mr. Crumlum had lately got, which is believed to be of the Founder’s own
writing. After all the speeches, in which my brother John came off as
well as any of the rest, I went straight home and dined, then to the
Hall, where in the Palace I saw Monk’s soldiers abuse Billing and all
the Quakers, that were at a meeting-place there, and indeed the soldiers
did use them very roughly and were to blame.

     [“Fox, or some other ‘weighty’ friend, on hearing of this,
     complained to Monk, who issued the following order, dated March 9th:
     ‘I do require all officers and soldiers to forbear to disturb
     peaceable meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to
     the Parliament or the Commonwealth of England.  George Monk.’  This
     order, we are told, had an excellent effect on the soldiers.”--A. C.
     Bickley’s ‘George Fox and the Early Quakers, London, 1884, p. 179.
     The Quakers were at this time just coming into notice.  The first
     preaching of George Fox, the founder, was in 1648, and in 1655 the
     preachers of the sect numbered seventy-three.  Fox computed that
     there were seldom less than a thousand quakers in prison.  The
     statute 13 and 14 Car. II.  cap. i. (1662) was “An act for
     preventing the mischiefs and dangers that may arise by certain
     persons called quakers and others, refusing to take lawful oaths.”
      Billing is mentioned again on July 22nd, 1667, when he addressed
     Pepys in Westminster Hall.]

So after drinking with Mr. Spicer, who had received L600 for me this
morning, I went to Capt. Stone and with him by coach to the Temple
Gardens (all the way talking of the disease of the stone), where we met
Mr. Squib, but would do nothing till to-morrow morning. Thence back on
foot home, where I found a letter from my Lord in character [private
cryptic code Ed.], which I construed, and after my wife had shewn me
some ribbon and shoes that she had taken out of a box of Mr. Montagu’s
which formerly Mr. Kipps had left here when his master was at sea, I
went to Mr. Crew and advised with him about it, it being concerning my
Lord’s coming up to Town, which he desires upon my advice the last week
in my letter. Thence calling upon Mrs. Ann I went home, and wrote in
character to my Lord in answer to his letter. This day Mr. Crew told
me that my Lord St. John is for a free Parliament, and that he is very
great with Monk, who hath now the absolute command and power to do any
thing that he hath a mind to do. Mr. Moore told me of a picture hung
up at the Exchange of a great pair of buttocks shooting of a turd into
Lawson’s mouth, and over it was wrote “The thanks of the house.” Boys do
now cry “Kiss my Parliament, instead of “Kiss my [rump],” so great and
general a contempt is the Rump come to among all the good and bad.

8th. A little practice on my flageolet, and afterwards walking in my
yard to see my stock of pigeons, which begin now with the spring to
breed very fast. I was called on by Mr. Fossan, my fellow pupil at
Cambridge, and I took him to the Swan in the Palace yard, and drank
together our morning draft. Thence to my office, where I received money,
and afterwards Mr. Carter, my old friend at Cambridge, meeting me as I
was going out of my office I took him to the Swan, and in the way I met
with Captain Lidcott, and so we three went together and drank there, the
Captain talking as high as ever he did, and more because of the fall of
his brother Thurlow.

     [John Thurloe, born 1616; Secretary of State to Cromwell; M.P. for
     Ely, 1656, and for the University of Cambridge in Richard Cromwell’s
     Parliament of December, 1658.  He was never employed after the
     Restoration, although the King solicited his services.  He died
     February 21st, 1668.  Pepys spells the name Thurlow, which was a
     common spelling at the time.]

Hence I went to Captain Stone, who told me how Squib had been with him,
and that he could do nothing with him, so I returned to Mr. Carter and
with him to Will’s, where I spent upon him and Monsieur L’Impertinent,
alias Mr. Butler, who I took thither with me, and thence to a Rhenish
wine house, and in our way met with Mr. Hoole, where I paid for my cozen
Roger Pepys his wine, and after drinking we parted. So I home, in my way
delivering a letter which among the rest I had from my Lord to-day to
Sir N. Wheeler. At home my wife’s brother brought her a pretty black
dog which I liked very well, and went away again. Hence sending a porter
with the hamper of bottles to the Temple I called in my way upon Mrs.
Jem, who was much frighted till I came to tell her that her mother was
well. So to the Temple, where I delivered the wine and received the
money of my cos. Roger that I laid out, and thence to my father’s, where
he shewed me a base angry letter that he had newly received from my
uncle Robert about my brother John, at which my father was very sad, but
I comforted him and wrote an answer. My brother John has an exhibition
granted him from the school. My father and I went down to his kitchen,
and there we eat and drank, and about 9 o’clock I went away homewards,
and in Fleet Street, received a great jostle from a man that had a mind
to take the wall, which I could not help?

     [This was a constant trouble to the pedestrian until the rule of
     passing to the right of the person met was generally accepted.  Gay
     commences his “Trivia” with an allusion to this--

          “When to assert the wall, and when resign--”

     and the epigram on the haughty courtier and the scholar is well
     known.]

I came home and to bed. Went to bed with my head not well by my too
much drinking to-day, and I had a boil under my chin which troubled me
cruelly.

9th. Soon as out of my bed I wrote letters into the country to go by
carrier to-day. Before I was out of my bed, I heard the soldiers very
busy in the morning, getting their horses ready where they lay at
Hilton’s, but I knew not then their meaning in so doing: After I had
wrote my letters I went to Westminster up and down the Hall, and with
Mr. Swan walked a good [deal] talking about Mr. Downing’s business.
I went with him to Mr. Phelps’s house where he had some business to
solicit, where we met Mr. Rogers my neighbour, who did solicit against
him and talked very high, saying that he would not for a L1000 appear in
a business that Swan did, at which Swan was very angry, but I believe
he might be guilty enough. In the Hall I understand how Monk is this
morning gone into London with his army; and met with Mr. Fage, who
told me that he do believe that Monk is gone to secure some of the
Common-council of the City, who were very high yesterday there, and did
vote that they would not pay any taxes till the House was filled up.
I went to my office, where I wrote to my Lord after I had been at the
Upper Bench, where Sir Robert Pye

     [Sir Robert Pye, the elder, was auditor of the Exchequer, and a
     staunch Royalist.  He garrisoned his house at Faringdon, which was
     besieged by his son, of the same names, a decided Republican, son-
     in-law to Hampden, and colonel of horse under Fairfax.  The son,
     here spoken of, was subsequently committed to the Tower for
     presenting a petition to the House of Commons from the county of
     Berks, which he represented in Parliament, complaining of the want
     of a settled form of government.  He had, however, the courage to
     move for an habeas corpus, but judge Newdigate decided that the
     courts of law had not the power to discharge him.  Upon Monk’s
     coming to London, the secluded members passed a vote to liberate
     Pye, and at the Restoration he was appointed equerry to the King.
     He died in 1701.--B.]

this morning came to desire his discharge from the Tower; but it could
not be granted. After that I went to Mrs. Jem, who I had promised to go
along with to her Aunt Wright’s, but she was gone, so I went thither,
and after drinking a glass of sack I went back to Westminster Hall, and
meeting with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who would needs take me home, where
Mr. Lucy, Burrell, and others dined, and after dinner I went home and
to Westminster Hall, where meeting Swan I went with him by water to the
Temple to our Counsel, and did give him a fee to make a motion to-morrow
in the Exchequer for Mr. Downing. Thence to Westminster Hall, where
I heard an action very finely pleaded between my Lord Dorset and some
other noble persons, his lady and other ladies of quality being here,
and it was about; L330 per annum, that was to be paid to a poor Spittal,
which was given by some of his predecessors; and given on his side.
Thence Swan and I to a drinking-house near Temple Bar, where while he
wrote I played on my flageolet till a dish of poached eggs was got ready
for us, which we eat, and so by coach home. I called at Mr. Harper’s,
who told me how Monk had this day clapt up many of the Common-council,
and that the Parliament had voted that he should pull down their gates
and portcullisses, their posts and their chains, which he do intend to
do, and do lie in the City all night. I went home and got some ahlum
to my mouth, where I have the beginnings of a cancer, and had also a
plaster to my boil underneath my chin.

10th. In the morning I went to Mr. Swan, who took me to the Court of
Wards, where I saw the three Lords Commissioners sitting upon some cause
where Mr. Scobell was concerned, and my Lord Fountaine took him up
very roughly about some things that he said. After that we went to the
Exchequer, where the Barons were hearing of causes, and there I made
affidavit that Mr. Downing was gone into Holland by order of the Council
of State, and this affidavit I gave to Mr. Stevens our lawyer. Thence to
my office, where I got money of Mr. Hawly to pay the lawyer, and there
found Mr. Lenard, one of the Clerks of the Council, and took him to the
Swan and gave him his morning draft. Then home to dinner, and after that
to the Exchequer, where I heard all the afternoon a great many causes
before the Barons; in the end came ours, and Squib proved clearly by his
patent that the house and office did now belong to him. Our lawyer made
some kind of opposition, but to no purpose, and so the cause was found
against us, and the foreman of the jury brought in L10 damages, which
the whole Court cried shame of, and so he cried 12d. Thence I went home,
vexed about this business, and there I found Mr. Moore, and with him
went into London to Mr. Fage about the cancer in my mouth, which begins
to grow dangerous, who gave me something for it, and also told me what
Monk had done in the City, how he had pulled down the most part of the
gates and chains that they could break down, and that he was now gone
back to White Hall. The City look mighty blank, and cannot tell what
in the world to do; the Parliament having this day ordered that the
Common-council sit no more; but that new ones be chosen according to
what qualifications they shall give them. Thence I went and drank with
Mr. Moore at the Sugar Loaf by Temple Bar, where Swan and I were last
night, and so we parted. At home I found Mr. Hunt, who sat talking with
me awhile, and so to bed.

11th. This morning I lay long abed, and then to my office, where I read
all the morning my Spanish book of Rome. At noon I walked in the Hall,
where I heard the news of a letter from Monk, who was now gone into the
City again, and did resolve to stand for the sudden filling up of the
House, and it was very strange how the countenance of men in the Hall
was all changed with joy in half an hour’s time. So I went up to the
lobby, where I saw the Speaker reading of the letter; and after it was
read, Sir A. Haselrigge came out very angry, and Billing--[The quaker
mentioned before on the 7th of this month.]--standing at the door,
took him by the arm, and cried, “Thou man, will thy beast carry thee no
longer? thou must fall!” The House presently after rose, and appointed
to meet again at three o’clock. I went then down into the Hall, where I
met with Mr. Chetwind, who had not dined no more than myself, and so we
went toward London, in our way calling at two or three shops, but could
have no dinner. At last, within Temple Bar, we found a pullet ready
roasted, and there we dined. After that he went to his office in
Chancery Lane, calling at the Rolls, where I saw the lawyers pleading.
Then to his office, where I sat in his study singing, while he was with
his man (Mr. Powell’s son) looking after his business. Thence we took
coach for the City to Guildhall, where the Hall was full of people
expecting Monk and Lord Mayor to come thither, and all very joyfull.
Here we stayed a great while, and at last meeting with a friend of
his we went to the 3 Tun tavern and drank half a pint of wine, and not
liking the wine we went to an alehouse, where we met with company of
this third man’s acquaintance, and there we drank a little. Hence I went
alone to Guildhall to see whether Monk was come again or no, and met
with him coming out of the chamber where he had been with the Mayor and
Aldermen, but such a shout I never heard in all my life, crying out,
“God bless your Excellence.” Here I met with Mr. Lock, and took him to
an alehouse, and left him there to fetch Chetwind; when we were come
together, Lock told us the substance of the letter that went from Monk
to the Parliament; wherein, after complaints that he and his officers
were put upon such offices against the City as they could not do with
any content or honour, that there are many members now in the House that
were of the late tyrannical Committee of Safety. That Lambert and Vane
are now in town, contrary to the vote of Parliament. That there were
many in the House that do press for new oaths to be put upon men;
whereas we have more cause to be sorry for the many oaths that we have
already taken and broken. That the late petition of the fanatique people
presented by Barebone, for the imposing of an oath upon all sorts of
people, was received by the House with thanks. That therefore he [Monk]
do desire that all writs for filling up of the House be issued by Friday
next, and that in the mean time, he would retire into the City and
only leave them guards for the security of the House and Council. The
occasion of this was the order that he had last night to go into the
City and disarm them, and take away their charter; whereby he and his
officers say that the House had a mind to put them upon things that
should make them odious; and so it would be in their power to do what
they would with them. He told us that they [the Parliament] had sent
Scott and Robinson to him [Monk] this afternoon, but he would not hear
them. And that the Mayor and Aldermen had offered him their own houses
for himself and his officers; and that his soldiers would lack for
nothing. And indeed I saw many people give the soldiers drink and money,
and all along in the streets cried, “God bless them!” and extraordinary
good words. Hence we went to a merchant’s house hard by, where Lock
wrote a note and left, where I saw Sir Nich. Crisp, and so we went to
the Star Tavern (Monk being then at Benson’s), where we dined and I
wrote a letter to my Lord from thence. In Cheapside there was a great
many bonfires, and Bow bells and all the bells in all the churches as
we went home were a-ringing. Hence we went homewards, it being about ten
o’clock. But the common joy that was every where to be seen! The number
of bonfires, there being fourteen between St. Dunstan’s and Temple Bar,
and at Strand Bridge’ I could at one view tell thirty-one fires. In
King-street seven or eight; and all along burning, and roasting, and
drinking for rumps. There being rumps tied upon sticks and carried up
and down. The butchers at the May Pole in the Strand rang a peal with
their knives when they were going to sacrifice their rump. On Ludgate
Hill there was one turning of the spit that had a rump tied upon it,
and another basting of it. Indeed it was past imagination, both the
greatness and the suddenness of it. At one end of the street you would
think there was a whole lane of fire, and so hot that we were fain to
keep still on the further side merely for heat. We came to the Chequers
at Charing Cross, where Chetwind wrote a letter and I gave him an
account of what I had wrote for him to write. Thence home and sent my
letters to the posthouse in London, and my wife and I (after Mr. Hunt
was gone, whom I found waiting at my house) went out again to show her
the fires, and after walking as far as the Exchange we returned and to
bed.

12th. In the morning, it being Lord’s day, Mr. Pierce came to me to
enquire how things go. We drank our morning draft together and thence
to White Hall, where Dr. Hones preached; but I staid not to hear, but
walking in the court, I heard that Sir Arth. Haselrigge was newly gone
into the City to Monk, and that Monk’s wife removed from White Hall last
night. Home again, where at noon came according to my invitation my cos.
Thos. Pepys and his partner and dined with me, but before dinner we went
and took a walk round the park, it being a most pleasant day as ever I
saw. After dinner we three went into London together, where I heard that
Monk had been at Paul’s in the morning, and the people had shouted much
at his coming out of the church. In the afternoon he was at a church in
Broad-street, whereabout he do lodge. But not knowing how to see him we
went and walked half a hour in Moorfields, which were full of people, it
being so fine a day. Here I took leave of them, and so to Paul’s, where
I met with Mr. Kirton’s’ apprentice (the crooked fellow) and walked
up and down with him two hours, sometimes in the street looking for a
tavern to drink in, but not finding any open, we durst not knock; other
times in the churchyard, where one told me that he had seen the letter
printed. Thence to Mr. Turner’s, where I found my wife, Mr. Edw. Pepys,
and Roger’ and Mr. Armiger being there, to whom I gave as good an
account of things as I could, and so to my father’s, where Charles
Glascocke was overjoyed to see how things are now; who told me the boys
had last night broke Barebone’s windows. Hence home, and being near home
we missed our maid, and were at a great loss and went back a great way
to find her, but when we could not see her we went homewards and found
her there, got before us which we wondered at greatly. So to bed, where
my wife and I had some high words upon my telling her that I would fling
the dog which her brother gave her out of window if he [dirtied] the
house any more.

13th. To my office till noon, thence home to dinner, my mouth being
very bad of the cancer and my left leg beginning to be sore again. After
dinner to see Mrs. Jem, and in the way met with Catan on foot in the
street and talked with her a little, so home and took my wife to my
father’s. In my way I went to Playford’s, and for two books that I had
and 6s. 6d. to boot I had my great book of songs which he sells always
for r 4s. At my father’s I staid a while, while my mother sent her maid
Bess to Cheapside for some herbs to make a water for my mouth. Then I
went to see Mr. Cumberland, and after a little stay with him I returned,
and took my wife home, where after supper to bed. This day Monk was
invited to White Hall to dinner by my Lords; not seeming willing, he
would not come. I went to Mr. Fage from my father’s, who had been this
afternoon with Monk, who do promise to live and die with the City, and
for the honour of the City; and indeed the City is very open-handed to
the soldiers, that they are most of them drunk all day, and have money
given them. He did give me something for my mouth which I did use this
night.

14th. Called out in the morning by Mr. Moore, whose voice my wife
hearing in my dressing-chamber with me, got herself ready, and came down
and challenged him for her valentine, this being the day.

     [The practice of choosing valentines was very general at this time,
     but some of the best examples of the custom are found in this
     Diary.]

To Westminster Hall, there being many new remonstrances and declarations
from many counties to Monk and the City, and one coming from the North
from Sir Thomas Fairfax. Hence I took him to the Swan and gave him his
morning draft. So to my office, where Mr. Hill of Worcestershire came
to see me and my partner in our office, with whom we went to Will’s to
drink. At noon I went home and so to Mr. Crew’s, but they had dined, and
so I went to see Mrs. Jem where I stayed a while, and home again where
I stayed an hour or two at my lute, and so forth to Westminster Hall,
where I heard that the Parliament hath now changed the oath so much
talked of to a promise; and that among other qualifications for the
members that are to be chosen, one is, that no man, nor the son of
any man that hath been in arms during the life of the father, shall be
capable of being chosen to sit in Parliament. To Will’s, where like a
fool I staid and lost 6d. at cards. So home, and wrote a letter to my
Lord by the post. So after supper to bed. This day, by an order of the
House, Sir H. Vane was sent out of town to his house in Lincolnshire.

15th. Called up in the morning by Captain Holland and Captain Cuttance,
and with them to Harper’s, thence to my office, thence with Mr. Hill of
Worcestershire to Will’s, where I gave him a letter to Nan Pepys, and
some merry pamphlets against the Rump to carry to her into the country.
So to Mr. Crew’s, where the dining room being full, Mr. Walgrave and
I dined below in the buttery by ourselves upon a good dish of buttered
salmon. Thence to Hering’ the merchant about my Lord’s Worcester money
and back to Paul’s Churchyard, where I staid reading in Fuller’s History
of the Church of England an hour or two, and so to my father’s, where
Mr. Hill came to me and I gave him direction what to do at Worcester
about the money. Thence to my Lady Wright’s and gave her a letter from
my Lord privily. So to Mrs. Jem and sat with her, who dined at Mr.
Crew’s to-day, and told me that there was at her coming away at least
forty gentlemen (I suppose members that were secluded, for Mr. Walgrave
told me that there were about thirty met there the last night) came
dropping in one after another thither. Thence home and wrote into the
country against to-morrow by the carrier and so to bed. At my father’s
I heard how my cousin Kate Joyce had a fall yesterday from her horse
and had some hurt thereby. No news to-day, but all quiet to see what the
Parliament will do about the issuing of the writs to-morrow for filling
up of the House, according to Monk’s desire.

16th, In the morning at my lute. Then came Shaw and Hawly, and I gave
them their morning draft at my house. So to my office, where I wrote by
the carrier to my Lord and sealed my letter at Will’s, and gave it old
East to carry it to the carrier’s, and to take up a box of china oranges
and two little barrels of scallops at my house, which Captain Cuttance
sent to me for my Lord. Here I met with Osborne and with Shaw and
Spicer, and we went to the Sun Tavern in expectation of a dinner, where
we had sent us only two trenchers-full of meat, at which we were very
merry, while in came Mr. Wade and his friend Capt. Moyse (who told us
of his hopes to get an estate merely for his name’s sake), and here we
staid till seven at night, I winning a quart of sack of Shaw that one
trencherfull that was sent us was all lamb and he that it was veal. I
by having but 3d. in my pocket made shift to spend no more, whereas if
I had had more I had spent more as the rest did, so that I see it is
an advantage to a man to carry little in his pocket. Home, and after
supper, and a little at my flute, I went to bed.

17th. In the morning Tom that was my Lord’s footboy came to see me and
had 10s. of me of the money which I have to keep of his. So that now I
have but 35s. more of his. Then came Mr. Hills the instrument maker, and
I consulted with him about the altering my lute and my viall. After that
I went into my study and did up my accounts, and found that I am about;
L40 beforehand in the world, and that is all. So to my office and from
thence brought Mr. Hawly home with me to dinner, and after dinner wrote
a letter to Mr. Downing about his business and gave it Hawly, and so
went to Mr. Gunning’s to his weekly fast, and after sermon, meeting
there with Monsieur L’Impertinent, we went and walked in the park till
it was dark. I played on my pipe at the Echo, and then drank a cup of
ale at Jacob’s. So to Westminster Hall, and he with me, where I heard
that some of the members of the House were gone to meet with some of the
secluded members and General Monk in the City. Hence we went to White
Hall, thinking to hear more news, where I met with Mr. Hunt, who told me
how Monk had sent for all his goods that he had here into the City; and
yet again he told me, that some of the members of the House had this day
laid in firing into their lodgings at White Hall for a good while,
so that we are at a great stand to think what will become of
things, whether Monk will stand to the Parliament or no. Hence Mons.
L’Impertinent and I to Harper’s, and there drank a cup or two to the
King, and to his fair sister Frances--[Frances Butler, the great beauty,
who is sometimes styled. la belle Boteler.]--good health, of whom we had
much discourse of her not being much the worse for the small pox, which
she had this last summer. So home and to bed. This day we are invited to
my uncle Fenner’s wedding feast, but went not, this being the 27th year.

18th. A great while at my vial and voice, learning to sing “Fly boy, fly
boy,” without book. So to my office, where little to do. In the Hall I
met with Mr. Eglin and one Looker, a famous gardener, servant to my Lord
Salsbury, and among other things the gardener told a strange passage in
good earnest.... Home to dinner, and then went to my Lord’s lodgings to
my turret there and took away most of my books, and sent them home by
my maid. Thither came Capt. Holland to me who took me to the Half Moon
tavern and Mr. Southorne, Blackburne’s clerk. Thence he took me to the
Mitre in Fleet Street, where we heard (in a room over the music room)
very plainly through the ceiling. Here we parted and I to Mr. Wotton’s,
and with him to an alehouse and drank while he told me a great many
stories of comedies that he had formerly seen acted, and the names of
the principal actors, and gave me a very good account of it. Thence to
Whitehall, where I met with Luellin and in the clerk’s chamber wrote a
letter to my Lord. So home and to bed. This day two soldiers were hanged
in the Strand for their late mutiny at Somerset-house.

19th (Lord’s day). Early in the morning I set my books that I brought
home yesterday up in order in my study. Thence forth to Mr. Harper’s to
drink a draft of purle,--[Purl is hot beer flavoured with wormwood or
other aromatic herbs. The name is also given to hot beer flavoured with
gin, sugar, and ginger.]--whither by appointment Monsieur L’Impertinent,
who did intend too upon my desire to go along with me to St.
Bartholomew’s, to hear one Mr. Sparks, but it raining very hard we went
to Mr. Gunning’s and heard an excellent sermon, and speaking of the
character that the Scripture gives of Ann the mother of the blessed
Virgin, he did there speak largely in commendation of widowhood, and
not as we do to marry two or three wives or husbands, one after another.
Here I met with Mr. Moore, and went home with him to dinner, where he
told me the discourse that happened between the secluded members and the
members of the House, before Monk last Friday. How the secluded said,
that they did not intend by coming in to express revenge upon these men,
but only to meet and dissolve themselves, and only to issue writs for a
free Parliament. He told me how Haselrigge was afraid to have the candle
carried before him, for fear that the people seeing him, would do him
hurt; and that he is afraid to appear in the City. That there is great
likelihood that the secluded members will come in, and so Mr. Crew and
my Lord are likely to be great men, at which I was very glad. After
diner there was many secluded members come in to Mr. Crew, which,
it being the Lord’s day, did make Mr. Moore believe that there was
something extraordinary in the business. Hence home and brought my wife
to Mr. Mossum’s to hear him, and indeed he made a very good sermon, but
only too eloquent for a pulpit. Here Mr. L’Impertinent helped me to a
seat. After sermon to my father’s; and fell in discourse concerning our
going to Cambridge the next week with my brother John. To Mrs. Turner
where her brother, Mr. Edward Pepys, was there, and I sat a great while
talking of public business of the times with him. So to supper to my
Father’s, all supper talking of John’s going to Cambridge. So home, and
it raining my wife got my mother’s French mantle and my brother John’s
hat, and so we went all along home and to bed.

20th. In the morning at my lute. Then to my office, where my partner
and I made even our balance. Took him home to dinner with me, where my
brother John came to dine with me. After dinner I took him to my study
at home and at my Lord’s, and gave him some books and other things
against his going to Cambridge. After he was gone I went forth to
Westminster Hall, where I met with Chetwind, Simons, and Gregory. And
with them to Marsh’s at Whitehall to drink, and staid there a pretty
while reading a pamphlet well writ and directed to General Monk, in
praise of the form of monarchy which was settled here before the wars.

     [This pamphlet is among the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts
     (British Museum), and dated in MS.  this same day, February 20th--
     “A Plea for Limited Monarchy as it was established in this Nation
     before the late War.  In an Humble Address to his Excellency General
     Monck.  By a Zealot for the good old Laws of his Country, before any
     Faction or Caprice, with additions.”  “An Eccho to the Plea for
     Limited Monarchy, &c.,” was published soon afterwards.]

They told me how the Speaker Lenthall do refuse to sign the writs for
choice of new members in the place of the excluded; and by that means
the writs could not go out to-day. In the evening Simons and I to the
Coffee Club, where nothing to do only I heard Mr. Harrington, and my
Lord of Dorset and another Lord, talking of getting another place as the
Cockpit, and they did believe it would come to something. After a small
debate upon the question whether learned or unlearned subjects are the
best the Club broke up very poorly, and I do not think they will meet
any more. Hence with Vines, &c. to Will’s, and after a pot or two home,
and so to bed.

21st. In the morning going out I saw many soldiers going towards
Westminster, and was told that they were going to admit the secluded
members again. So I to Westminster Hall, and in Chancery Row I saw about
twenty of them who had been at White Hall with General Monk, who came
thither this morning, and made a speech to them, and recommended to them
a Commonwealth, and against Charles Stuart. They came to the House and
went in one after another, and at last the Speaker came. But it is very
strange that this could be carried so private, that the other members of
the House heard nothing of all this, till they found them in the House,
insomuch that the soldiers that stood there to let in the secluded
members, they took for such as they had ordered to stand there to hinder
their coming in. Mr. Prin came with an old basket-hilt sword on, and had
a great many great shouts upon his going into the Hall. They sat till
noon, and at their coming out Mr. Crew saw me, and bid me come to his
house, which I did, and he would have me dine with him, which I did; and
he very joyful told me that the House had made General Monk, General of
all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that upon Monk’s
desire, for the service that Lawson had lately done in pulling down the
Committee of Safety, he had the command of the Sea for the time being.
He advised me to send for my Lord forthwith, and told me that there is
no question that, if he will, he may now be employed again; and that the
House do intend to do nothing more than to issue writs, and to settle
a foundation for a free Parliament. After dinner I back to Westminster
Hall with him in his coach. Here I met with Mr. Lock and Pursell,
Masters of Music,--[Henry Purcell, father of the celebrated composer,
was gentleman of the Chapel Royal.]--and with them to the Coffee House,
into a room next the water, by ourselves, where we spent an hour or two
till Captain Taylor came to us, who told us, that the House had voted
the gates of the City to be made up again, and the members of the City
that are in prison to be set at liberty; and that Sir G. Booth’s’
case be brought into the House to-morrow. Here we had variety of brave
Italian and Spanish songs, and a canon for eight voices, which Mr. Lock
had lately made on these words: “Domine salvum fac Regem,” an admirable
thing. Here also Capt. Taylor began a discourse of something that he had
lately writ about Gavelkind in answer to one that had wrote a piece
upon the same subject; and indeed discovered a great deal of study
in antiquity in his discourse. Here out of the window it was a most
pleasant sight to see the City from one end to the other with a glory
about it, so high was the light of the bonfires, and so thick round the
City, and the bells rang everywhere. Hence home and wrote to my Lord,
afterwards came down and found Mr. Hunt (troubled at this change) and
Mr. Spong, who staid late with me singing of a song or two, and so
parted. My wife not very well, went to bed before. This morning I met in
the Hall with Mr. Fuller, of Christ’s, and told him of my design to
go to Cambridge, and whither. He told me very freely the temper of Mr.
Widdrington, how he did oppose all the fellows in the College, and that
there was a great distance between him and the rest, at which I was very
sorry, for that he told me he feared it would be little to my brother’s
advantage to be his pupil.

22nd. In the morning intended to have gone to Mr. Crew’s to borrow some
money, but it raining I forbore, and went to my Lord’s lodging and look
that all things were well there. Then home and sang a song to my viall,
so to my office and to Will’s, where Mr. Pierce found me out, and told
me that he would go with me to Cambridge, where Colonel Ayre’s regiment,
to which he was surgeon, lieth. Walking in the Hall, I saw Major-General
Brown, who had along time been banished by the Rump, but now with his
beard overgrown, he comes abroad and sat in the House. To my father’s
to dinner, where nothing but a small dish of powdered beef--[Boiled
salt beef. To powder was to sprinkle with salt, and the powdering tub a
vessel in which meat was salted.]--and dish of carrots; they being all
busy to get things ready for my brother John to go to-morrow. After
dinner, my wife staying there, I went to Mr. Crew’s, and got; L5 of Mr.
Andrews, and so to Mrs. Jemimah, who now hath her instrument about her
neck, and indeed is infinitely, altered, and holds her head upright. I
paid her, maid 40s. of the money that I have received of Mr. Andrews.
Hence home to my study, where I only wrote thus much of this day’s
passages to this * and so out again. To White Hall, where I met with
Will. Simons and Mr. Mabbot at Marsh’s, who told me how the House had
this day voted that the gates of the City should be set up at the cost
of the State. And that Major-General Brown’s being proclaimed a traitor
be made void, and several other things of that nature. Home for my
lanthorn and so to my father’s, where I directed John what books to put
for Cambridge. After that to supper, where my Uncle Fenner and my Aunt,
The. Turner, and Joyce, at a brave leg of veal roasted, and were
very merry against John’s going to Cambridge. I observed this day how
abominably Barebone’s windows are broke again last night. At past 9
o’clock my wife and I went home.

23rd. Thursday, my birthday, now twenty-seven years. A pretty fair
morning, I rose and after writing a while in my study I went forth.
To my office, where I told Mr. Hawly of my thoughts to go out of town
to-morrow. Hither Mr. Fuller comes to me and my Uncle Thomas too, thence
I took them to drink, and so put off my uncle. So with Mr. Fuller home
to my house, where he dined with me, and he told my wife and me a great
many stories of his adversities, since these troubles, in being forced
to travel in the Catholic countries, &c. He shewed me his bills, but I
had not money to pay him. We parted, and I to Whitehall, where I was to
see my horse which Mr. Garthwayt lends me to-morrow. So home, where Mr.
Pierce comes to me about appointing time and place where and when to
meet tomorrow. So to Westminster Hall, where, after the House rose, I
met with Mr. Crew, who told me that my Lord was chosen by 73 voices,
to be one of the Council of State. Mr. Pierpoint had the most, 101,
and himself the next, too. He brought me in the coach home. He and Mr.
Anslow being in it. I back to the Hall, and at Mrs. Michell’s shop staid
talking a great while with her and my Chaplain, Mr. Mumford, and drank
a pot or two of ale on a wager that Mr. Prin is not of the Council. Home
and wrote to my Lord the news of the choice of the Council by the post,
and so to bed.

24th. I rose very early, and taking horse at Scotland Yard, at Mr.
Garthwayt’s stable, I rode to Mr. Pierces, who rose, and in a quarter of
an hour, leaving his wife in bed (with whom Mr. Lucy methought was very
free as she lay in bed), we both mounted, and so set forth about seven
of the clock, the day and the way very foul. About Ware we overtook Mr.
Blayton, brother-in-law to Dick Vines, who went thenceforwards with us,
and at Puckeridge we baited, where we had a loin of mutton fried, and
were very merry, but the way exceeding bad from Ware thither. Then up
again and as far as Foulmer, within six miles of Cambridge, my mare
being almost tired: here we lay at the Chequer, playing at cards till
supper, which was a breast of veal roasted. I lay with Mr. Pierce, who
we left here the next morning upon his going to Hinchingbroke to speak
with my Lord before his going to London, and we two come to Cambridge by
eight o’clock in the morning.

25th. To the Falcon, in the Petty Cury,

     [The old Falcon Inn is on the south side of Petty Cury.  It is now
     divided into three houses, one of which is the present Falcon Inn,
     the other two being houses with shops.  The Falcon yard is but
     little changed.  From the size of the whole building it must have
     been the principal inn of the town.  The room said to have been used
     by Queen Elizabeth for receptions retains its original form.--M. B.

     The Petty Cury.  The derivation of the name of this street, so well
     known to all Cambridge men, is a matter of much dispute among
     antiquaries.  (See “Notes and Queries.”) The most probable meaning
     of it is the Parva Cokeria, or little cury, where the cooks of the
     town lived, just as “The Poultry,” where the Poulters (now
     Poulterers) had their shops.  “The Forme of Cury,” a Roll of Antient
     English Cookery, was compiled by the principal cooks of that “best
     and royalest viander of all Christian Kings,” Richard the Second,
     and edited with a copious Index and Glossary by Dr. Samuel Pegge,
     1780.--M. B.]

where we found my father and brother very well. After dressing myself,
about ten o’clock, my father, brother, and I to Mr. Widdririgton, at
Christ’s College, who received us very civilly, and caused my brother to
be admitted, while my father, he, and I, sat talking. After that
done, we take leave. My father and brother went to visit some friends,
Pepys’s, scholars in Cambridge, while I went to Magdalene College, to
Mr. Hill, with whom I found Mr. Zanchy, Burton, and Hollins, and was
exceeding civilly received by them. I took leave on promise to sup with
them, and to my Inn again, where I dined with some others that were
there at an ordinary. After dinner my brother to the College, and my
father and I to my Cozen Angier’s, to see them, where Mr. Fairbrother
came to us. Here we sat a while talking. My father he went to look
after his things at the carrier’s, and my brother’s chamber, while Mr.
Fairbrother, my Cozen Angier, and Mr. Zanchy, whom I met at Mr. Merton’s
shop (where I bought ‘Elenchus Motuum’, having given my former to Mr.
Downing when he was here), to the Three Tuns, where we drank pretty hard
and many healths to the King, &c., till it began to be darkish: then we
broke up and I and Mr. Zanchy went to Magdalene College, where a very
handsome supper at Mr. Hill’s chambers, I suppose upon a club among
them, where in their discourse I could find that there was nothing
at all left of the old preciseness in their discourse, specially on
Saturday nights. And Mr. Zanchy told me that there was no such thing
now-a-days among them at any time. After supper and some discourse
then to my Inn, where I found my father in his chamber, and after some
discourse, and he well satisfied with this day’s work, we went to bed,
my brother lying with me, his things not being come by the carrier that
he could not lie in the College.

26th (Sunday). My brother went to the College to Chapel. My father and
I went out in the morning, and walked out in the fields behind King’s
College, and in King’s College Chapel Yard, where we met with Mr.
Fairbrother, who took us to Botolph’s Church, where we heard Mr.
Nicholas, of Queen’s College, who I knew in my time to be Tripos,

     [The Tripos or Bachelor of the Stool, who made the speech on Ash
     Wednesday, when the senior Proctor called him up and exhorted him to
     be witty but modest withal.  Their speeches, especially after the
     Restoration, tended to be boisterous, and even scurrilous.
     “26 Martii 1669.  Da Hollis, fellow of Clare Hall is to make a
     publick Recantation in the Bac. Schools for his Tripos speeche.”
      The Tripos verses still come out, and are circulated on Ash
     Wednesday.  The list of successful candidates for honours is printed
     on the same paper, hence the term “Tripos” applied to it.]

with great applause, upon this text, “For thy commandments are broad.”
 Thence my father and I to Mr. Widdrington’s chamber to dinner, where he
used us very courteously again, and had two Fellow Commoners at table
with him, and Mr. Pepper, a Fellow of the College. After dinner, while
we sat talking by the fire, Mr. Pierces man came to tell me that his
master was come to town, so my father and I took leave, and found Mr.
Pierce at our Inn, who told us that he had lost his journey, for my Lord
was gone from Hinchingbroke to London on Thursday last, at which I was
a little put to a stand. So after a cup of drink I went to Magdalene
College to get the certificate of the College for my brother’s entrance
there, that he might save his year. I met with Mr. Burton in the Court,
who took me to Mr. Pechell’s chamber, where he was and Mr. Zanchy. By
and by, Mr. Pechell and Sanchy and I went out, Pechell to Church, Sanchy
and I to the Rose Tavern, where we sat and drank till sermon done, and
then Mr. Pechell came to us, and we three sat drinking the King’s and
his whole family’s health till it began to be dark. Then we parted;
Sanchy and I went to my lodging, where we found my father and Mr. Pierce
at the door, and I took them both and Mr. Blayton to the Rose Tavern,
and there gave them a quart or two of wine, not telling them that we had
been there before. After this we broke up, and my father, Mr. Zanchy,
and I to my Cosen Angier to supper, where I caused two bottles of wine
to be carried from the Rose Tavern; that was drunk up, and I had not the
wit to let them know at table that it was I that paid for them, and so I
lost my thanks for them. After supper Mr. Fairbrother, who supped there
with us, took me into a room by himself, and shewed me a pitiful copy
of verses upon Mr. Prinn which he esteemed very good, and desired that
I would get them given to Mr. Prinn, in hopes that he would get him some
place for it, which I said I would do, but did laugh in my sleeve to
think of his folly, though indeed a man that has always expressed great
civility to me. After that we sat down and talked; I took leave of
all my friends, and so to my Inn, where after I had wrote a note and
enclosed the certificate to Mr. Widdrington, I bade good night to my
father, and John went to bed, but I staid up a little while, playing the
fool with the lass of the house at the door of the chamber, and so to
bed.

27th. Up by four o’clock, and after I was ready, took my leave of my
father, whom I left in bed, and the same of my brother John, to whom I
gave 10s. Mr. Blayton and I took horse and straight to Saffron Walden,
where at the White Hart, we set up our horses, and took the master of
the house to shew us Audley End House, who took us on foot through
the park, and so to the house, where the housekeeper shewed us all the
house, in which the stateliness of the ceilings, chimney-pieces, and
form of the whole was exceedingly worth seeing. He took us into the
cellar, where we drank most admirable drink, a health to the King. Here
I played on my flageolette, there being an excellent echo. He shewed us
excellent pictures; two especially, those of the four Evangelists and
Henry VIII. After that I gave the man 2s. for his trouble, and went back
again. In our going, my landlord carried us through a very old hospital
or almshouse, where forty poor people was maintained; a very old
foundation; and over the chimney in the mantelpiece was an inscription
in brass: “Orate pre anima Thomae Bird,” &c.; and the poor box also was
on the same chimney-piece, with an iron door and locks to it, into which
I put 6d. They brought me a draft of their drink in a brown bowl, tipt
with silver, which I drank off, and at the bottom was a picture of the
Virgin and the child in her arms, done in silver. So we went to our Inn,
and after eating of something, and kissed the daughter of the house,
she being very pretty, we took leave, and so that night, the road pretty
good, but the weather rainy to Ep[p]ing, where we sat and played a game
at cards, and after supper, and some merry talk with a plain bold maid
of the house, we went to bed.

28th. Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast,
while my boot-heel was a-mending, by the same token the boy left the
hole as big as it was before. Then to horse, and for London through the
forest, where we found the way good, but only in one path, which we kept
as if we had rode through a canal all the way. We found the shops all
shut, and the militia of the red regiment in arms at the Old Exchange,
among whom I found and spoke to Nich. Osborne, who told me that it was
a thanksgiving-day through the City for the return of the Parliament.
At Paul’s I light, Mr. Blayton holding my horse, where I found Dr.
Reynolds’ in the pulpit, and General Monk there, who was to have a great
entertainment at Grocers’ Hall. So home, where my wife and all well.
Shifted myself,--[Changed his dress.]--and so to Mr. Crew’s, and then to
Sir Harry Wright’s, where I found my Lord at dinner, who called for me
in, and was glad to see me. There was at dinner also Mr. John Wright and
his lady, a very pretty lady, Alderman Allen’s daughter. I dined
here with Will. Howe, and after dinner went out with him to buy a hat
(calling in my way and saw my mother), which we did at the Plough in
Fleet Street by my Lord’s direction, but not as for him. Here we met
with Mr. Pierce a little before, and he took us to the Greyhound Tavern,
and gave us a pint of wine, and as the rest of the seamen do, talked
very high again of my Lord. After we had done about the hat we went
homewards, he to Mr. Crew’s and I to Mrs. Jem, and sat with her a
little. Then home, where I found Mr. Sheply, almost drunk, come to see
me, afterwards Mr. Spong comes, with whom I went up and played with him
a Duo or two, and so good night. I was indeed a little vexed with Mr.
Sheply, but said nothing, about his breaking open of my study at my
house, merely to give him the key of the stair door at my Lord’s, which
lock he might better have broke than mine.

29th. To my office, and drank at Will’s with Mr. Moore, who told me how
my Lord is chosen General at Sea by the Council, and that it is thought
that Monk will be joined with him therein. Home and dined, after dinner
my wife and I by water to London, and thence to Herring’s, the merchant
in Coleman Street, about L50 which he promises I shall have on Saturday
next. So to my mother’s, and then to Mrs. Turner’s, of whom I took
leave, and her company, because she was to go out of town to-morrow
with Mr. Pepys into Norfolk. Here my cosen Norton gave me a brave cup of
metheglin,

     [A liquor made of honey and water, boiled and fermenting.  By 12
     Charles II.  cap. 23, a grant of certain impositions upon beer, ale,
     and other liquors, a duty of 1d.  per gallon was laid upon “all
     metheglin or mead.”]

the first I ever drank. To my mother’s and supped there.

She shewed me a letter to my father from my uncle inviting him to come
to Brampton while he is in the country. So home and to bed. This day my
Lord came to the House, the first time since he came to town; but he had
been at the Council before.




MARCH 1659-1660

March 1st. In the morning went to my Lord’s lodgings, thinking to have
spoke with Mr. Sheply, having not been to visit him since my coming to
town. But he being not within I went up, and out of the box where my
Lord’s pamphlets lay, I chose as many as I had a mind to have for my own
use and left the rest. Then to my office, where little to do, abut
Mr. Sheply comes to me, so at dinner time he and I went to Mr. Crew’s,
whither Mr. Thomas was newly come to town, being sent with Sir H.
Yelverton, a my old school-fellow at Paul’s School, to bring the thanks
of the county to General Monk for the return of the Parliament. But old
Mr. Crew and my Lord not coming home to dinner, we tarried late before
we went to dinner, it being the day that John, Mr. John Crew’s coachman,
was to be buried in the afternoon, he being a day or two before killed
with a blow of one of his horses that struck his skull into his brain.
From thence Mr. Sheply and I went into London to Mr. Laxton’s; my Lord’s
apothecary, and so by water to Westminster, where at the Sun [tavern] he
and I spent two or three hours in a pint or two of wine, discoursing of
matters in the country, among other things telling me that my uncle
did to him make a very kind mention of me, and what he would do for me.
Thence I went home, and went to bed betimes. This day the Parliament did
vote that they would not sit longer than the 15th day of this month.

2d. This morning I went early to my Lord at Mr. Crew’s, where I spoke to
him. Here were a great many come to see him, as Secretary Thurlow who is
now by this Parliament chosen again Secretary of State. There were also
General Monk’s trumpeters to give my Lord a sound of their trumpets this
morning. Thence I went to my office, and wrote a letter to Mr. Downing
about the business of his house. Then going home, I met with Mr. Eglin,
Chetwind, and Thomas, who took me to the Leg [another tavern] in King’s
street, where we had two brave dishes of meat, one of fish, a carp and
some other fishes, as well done as ever I ate any. After that to the
Swan tavern, where we drank a quart or two of wine, and so parted. So
I to Mrs. Jem and took Mr. Moore with me (who I met in the street), and
there I met W. Howe and Sheply. After that to Westminster Hall, where
I saw Sir G. Booth at liberty. This day I hear the City militia is put
into good posture, and it is thought that Monk will not be able to do
any great matter against them now, if he have a mind. I understand that
my Lord Lambert did yesterday send a letter to the Council, and that
to-night he is to come and appear to the Council in person. Sir Arthur
Haselrigge do not yet appear in the House. Great is the talk of a
single person, and that it would now be Charles, George, or Richard
again.--[Charles II., or George Monk, or Richard Cromwell.]--For the
last of which, my Lord St. John is said to speak high. Great also is the
dispute now in the House, in whose name the writs shall run for the next
Parliament; and it is said that Mr. Prin, in open House, said, “In King
Charles’s.” From Westminster Hall home. Spent the evening in my study,
and so after some talk with my wife, then to bed.

3d. To Westminster Hall, where I found that my Lord was last night voted
one of the Generals at Sea, and Monk the other. I met my Lord in the
Hall, who bid me come to him at noon. I met with Mr. Pierce the purser,
Lieut. Lambert, Mr. Creed, and Will. Howe, and went with them to the
Swan tavern. Up to my office, but did nothing. At noon home to dinner to
a sheep’s head. My brother Tom came and dined with me, and told me that
my mother was not very well, and that my Aunt Fenner was very ill too.
After dinner I to Warwick House, in Holborn, to my Lord, where he dined
with my Lord of Manchester, Sir Dudley North, my Lord Fiennes, and my
Lord Barkly. I staid in the great hall, talking with some gentlemen
there, till they all come out. Then I, by coach with my Lord, to Mr.
Crew’s, in our way talking of publick things, and how I should look
after getting of his Commissioner’s despatch. He told me he feared there
was new design hatching, as if Monk had a mind to get into the saddle.
Here I left him, and went by appointment to Hering, the merchant, but
missed of my money, at which I was much troubled, but could not help
myself. Returning, met Mr. Gifford, who took me and gave me half a pint
of wine, and told me, as I hear this day from many, that things are in a
very doubtful posture, some of the Parliament being willing to keep the
power in their hands. After I had left him, I met with Tom Harper,
who took me into a place in Drury Lane, where we drank a great deal
of strong water, more than ever I did in my life at onetime before. He
talked huge high that my Lord Protector would come in place again, which
indeed is much discoursed of again, though I do not see it possible.
Hence home and wrote to my father at Brampton by the post. So to bed.
This day I was told that my Lord General Fleetwood told my lord that he
feared the King of Sweden is dead of a fever at Gottenburg.

4th. Lord’s day. Before I went to church I sang Orpheus’ Hymn to my
viall. After that to Mr. Gunning’s, an excellent sermon upon charity.
Then to my mother to dinner, where my wife and the maid were come. After
dinner we three to Mr. Messum’s where we met Mons. L’Impertinent, who
got us a seat and told me a ridiculous story how that last week he had
caused a simple citizen to spend; L80 in entertainments of him and some
friends of his upon pretence of some service that he would do him in his
suit after a widow. Then to my mother again, and after supper she and I
talked very high about religion, I in defence of the religion I was born
in. Then home.

5th. Early in the morning Mr. Hill comes to string my theorbo,

     [The theorbo was a bass lute.  Having gut strings it was played with
     the fingers.  There is a humorous comparison of the long waists of
     ladies, which came into fashion about 1621, with the theorbo, by
     Bishop Corbet:

         “She was barr’d up in whale-bones, that did leese
          None of the whale’s length, for they reached her knees;
          Off with her head, and then she hath a middle
          As her waste stands, just like the new found fiddle,
          The favourite Theorbo, truth to tell ye,
          Whose neck and throat are deeper than the belly.”

                                   Corbet, ‘Iter Boreale’.]

which we were about till past ten o’clock, with a great deal of
pleasure. Then to Westminster, where I met with Mr. Sheply and Mr.
Pinkney at Will’s, who took me by water to Billingsgate, at the
Salutation Tavern, whither by-and-by, Mr. Talbot and Adams came, and
bring a great [deal of] good meat, a ham of bacon, &c. Here we staid
and drank till Mr. Adams began to be overcome. Then we parted, and so to
Westminster by water, only seeing Mr. Pinkney at his own house, where he
shewed me how he had alway kept the Lion and Unicorn, in the back of his
chimney, bright, in expectation of the King’s coming again. At home
I found Mr. Hunt, who told me how the Parliament had voted that the
Covenant be printed and hung in churches again. Great hopes of the
King’s coming again. To bed.

6th. (Shrove Tuesday.) I called Mr. Sheply and we both went up to my
Lord’s lodgings at Mr. Crew’s, where he bade us to go home again, and
get a fire against an hour after. Which we did at White Hall, whither
he came, and after talking with him and me about his going to sea, he
called me by myself to go along with him into the garden, where he asked
me how things were with me, and what he had endeavoured to do with my
uncle to get him to do something for me but he would say nothing too. He
likewise bade me look out now at this turn some good place, and he would
use all his own, and all the interest of his friends that he had in
England, to do me good. And asked me whether I could, without too much
inconvenience, go to sea as his secretary, and bid me think of it. He
also began to talk of things of State, and told me that he should want
one in that capacity at sea, that he might trust in, and therefore he
would have me to go. He told me also, that he did believe the King would
come in, and did discourse with me about it, and about the affection
of the people and City, at which I was full glad. After he was gone, I
waiting upon him through the garden till he came to the Hall, where I
left him and went up to my office, where Mr. Hawly brought one to me,
a seaman, that had promised Rio to him if he get him a purser’s place,
which I think to endeavour to do. Here comes my uncle Tom, whom I
took to Will’s and drank with, poor man, he comes to inquire about the
knights of Windsor, of which he desires to get to be one.

     [The body of Poor Knights of Windsor was founded by Edward III.  The
     intention of the king with regard to the poor knights was to provide
     relief and comfortable subsistence for such valiant soldiers as
     happened in their old age to fall into poverty and decay.  On
     September 20th, 1659, a Report having been read respecting the Poor
     Knights of Windsor, the House “ordered that it be referred to a
     Committee, to look into the revenue for maintenance of the Poor
     Knights of Windsor,” &c.  (See Tighe and Davis’s “Annals of
     Windsor.”)]

While we were drinking, in comes Mr. Day, a carpenter in Westminster, to
tell me that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that I must go with him to their
yearly Club upon this day, which I confess I had quite forgot. So I went
to the Bell, where were Mr. Eglin, Veezy, Vincent a butcher, one more,
and Mr. Tanner, with whom I played upon a viall, and he a viallin, after
dinner, and were very merry, with a special good dinner, a leg of veal
and bacon, two capons and sausages and fritters, with abundance of wine.
After that I went home, where I found Kate Sterpin who hath not been
here a great while before. She gone I went to see Mrs. Jem, at whose
chamber door I found a couple of ladies, but she not being there, we
hunted her out, and found that she and another had hid themselves behind
a door. Well, they all went down into the dining-room, where it was full
of tag, rag, and bobtail, dancing, singing, and drinking, of which I was
ashamed, and after I had staid a dance or two I went away. Going home,
called at my Lord’s for Mr. Sheply, but found him at the Lion with a
pewterer, that he had bought pewter to-day of. With them I drank, and so
home and wrote by the post, by my Lord’s command, for J. Goods to come
up presently. For my Lord intends to go forthwith into the Swiftsure
till the Nazeby be ready. This day I hear that the Lords do intend to
sit, and great store of them are now in town, and I see in the Hall
to-day. Overton at Hull do stand out, but can, it is thought, do
nothing; and Lawson, it is said, is gone with some ships thither, but
all that is nothing. My Lord told me, that there was great endeavours to
bring in the Protector again; but he told me, too, that he did believe
it would not last long if he were brought in; no, nor the King neither
(though he seems to think that he will come in), unless he carry himself
very soberly and well. Every body now drinks the King’s health without
any fear, whereas before it was very private that a man dare do it. Monk
this day is feasted at Mercers’ Hall, and is invited one after another
to all the twelve Halls in London! Many think that he is honest yet, and
some or more think him to be a fool that would raise himself, but think
that he will undo himself by endeavouring it. My mind, I must needs
remember, has been very much eased and joyed at my Lord’s great
expressions of kindness this day, and in discourse thereupon my wife and
I lay awake an hour or two in our bed.

7th. (Ash Wednesday.) In the morning I went to my Lord at Mr. Crew’s,
in my way Washington overtook me and told me upon my question whether
he knew of any place now void that I might have, by power over friends,
that this day Mr. G. Montagu was to be made ‘Custos Rotulorum’ for
Westminster, and that by friends I might get to be named by him Clerk of
the Peace, with which I was, as I am at all new things, very much joyed,
so when I came to Mr. Crew’s, I spoke to my Lord about it, who told me
he believed Mr. Montagu had already promised it, and that it was given
him only that he might gratify one person with the place I look for.
Here, among many that were here, I met with Mr. Lynes, the surgeon, who
promised me some seeds of the sensitive plant.

     [Evelyn, about the same date (August 9th, 1661), “tried several
     experiments on the sensitive plant and humilis, which contracted
     with the least touch of the sun through a burning glass, though it
     rises and opens only when it shines on it”]

I spoke too with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who gave me great encouragement
to go to sea with my Lord. Thence going homewards, my Lord overtook me
in his coach, and called me in, and so I went with him to St. James’s,
and G. Montagu being gone to White Hall, we walked over the Park
thither, all the way he discoursing of the times, and of the change
of things since the last year, and wondering how he could bear with so
great disappointment as he did. He did give me the best advice that he
could what was best for me, whether to stay or go with him, and offered
all the ways that could be, how he might do me good, with the greatest
liberty and love that could be. I left him at Whitehall, and myself went
to Westminster to my office, whither nothing to do, but I did discourse
with Mr. Falconbridge about Le Squire’s place, and had his consent to
get it if I could. I afterwards in the Hall met with W. Simons, who
put me in the best way how to get it done. Thence by appointment to
the Angel in King Street, where Chetwind, Mr. Thomas and Doling were at
oysters, and beginning Lent this day with a fish dinner. After dinner
Mr. Thomas and I by water to London, where I went to Herring’s and
received the L50 of my Lord’s upon Frank’s bill from Worcester. I gave
in the bill and set my hand to his bill. Thence I went to the Pope’s
Head Alley and called on Adam Chard, and bought a catcall there, it cost
me two groats. Thence went and gave him a cup of ale. After that to the
Sun behind the Exchange, where meeting my uncle Wight by the way, took
him with me thither, and after drinking a health or two round at the
Cock (Mr. Thomas being gone thither), we parted, he and I homewards,
parted at Fleet Street, where I found my father newly come home from
Brampton very well. He left my uncle with his leg very dangerous, and do
believe he cannot continue in that condition long. He tells me that my
uncle did acquaint him very largely what he did intend to do with his
estate, to make me his heir and give my brother Tom something, and that
my father and mother should have likewise something, to raise portions
for John and Pall. I pray God he may be as good as his word. Here I
staid and supped and so home, there being Joyce Norton there and Ch.
Glascock. Going home I called at Wotton’s and took home a piece of
cheese. At home Mr. Sheply sat with me a little while, and so we all
to bed. This news and my Lord’s great kindness makes me very cheerful
within. I pray God make me thankful. This day, according to order, Sir
Arthur [Haselrigge] appeared at the House; what was done I know not, but
there was all the Rumpers almost come to the House to-day. My Lord did
seem to wonder much why Lambert was so willing to be put into the Tower,
and thinks he has some design in it; but I think that he is so poor that
he cannot use his liberty for debts, if he were at liberty; and so it is
as good and better for him to be there, than any where else.

8th. To Whitehall to bespeak some firing for my father at Short’s, and
likewise to speak to Mr. Blackburne about Batters being gunner in the
“Wexford.” Then to Westminster Hall, where there was a general damp over
men’s minds and faces upon some of the Officers of the Army being about
making a remonstrance against Charles Stuart or any single person; but
at noon it was told, that the General had put a stop to it, so all was
well again. Here I met with Jasper, who was to look for me to bring me
to my Lord at the lobby; whither sending a note to my Lord, he comes out
to me and gives me direction to look after getting some money for him
from the Admiralty, seeing that things are so unsafe, that he would not
lay out a farthing for the State, till he had received some money of
theirs. Home about two o’clock, and took my wife by land to Paternoster
Row, to buy some Paragon for a petticoat and so home again. In my way
meeting Mr. Moore, who went home with me while I ate a bit and so back
to Whitehall again, both of us. He waited at the Council for Mr. Crew.
I to the Admiralty, where I got the order for the money, and have taken
care for the getting of it assigned upon Mr. Hutchinson, Treasurer for
the Navy, against tomorrow. Hence going home I met with Mr. King that
belonged to the Treasurers at War and took him to Harper’s, who told me
that he and the rest of his fellows are cast out of office by the new
Treasurers. This afternoon, some of the Officers of the Army, and some
of the Parliament, had a conference at White Hall to make all right
again, but I know not what is done. This noon I met at the Dog tavern
Captain Philip Holland, with whom I advised how to make some advantage
of my Lord’s going to sea, which he told me might be by having of
five or six servants entered on board, and I to give them what wages I
pleased, and so their pay to be mine; he was also very urgent to have
me take the Secretary’s place, that my Lord did proffer me. At the same
time in comes Mr. Wade and Mr. Sterry, secretary to the plenipotentiary
in Denmark, who brought the news of the death of the King of Sweden
at Gottenburgh the 3rd of the last month, and he told me what a great
change he found when he came here, the secluded members being restored.
He also spoke very freely of Mr. Wades profit, which he made while he
was in Zeeland, how he did believe that he cheated Mr. Powell, and that
he made above L500 on the voyage, which Mr. Wade did very angrily deny,
though I believe he was guilty enough.

9th. To my Lord at his lodging, and came to Westminster with him in the
coach, with Mr. Dudley with him, and he in the Painted Chamber

     [The Painted Chamber, or St. Edward’s Chamber, in the old Palace at
     Westminster.  The first name was given to it from the curious
     paintings on the walls, and the second from the tradition that
     Edward the Confessor died in it.]

walked a good while; and I telling him that I was willing and ready
to go with him to sea, he agreed that I should, and advised me what
to write to Mr. Downing about it, which I did at my office, that by my
Lord’s desire I offered that my place might for a while be supplied by
Mr. Moore, and that I and my security should be bound by the same bond
for him. I went and dined at Mr. Crew’s, where Mr. Hawly comes to me,
and I told him the business and shewed him the letter promising him L20
a year, which he liked very well of. I did the same to Mr. Moore, which
he also took for a courtesy. In the afternoon by coach, taking Mr.
Butler with me to the Navy Office, about the L500 for my Lord, which I
am promised to have to-morrow morning. Then by coach back again, and at
White Hall at the Council Chamber spoke with my Lord and got him to sign
the acquittance for the L500, and he also told me that he had spoke to
Mr. Blackburne to put off Mr. Creed and that I should come to him for
direction in the employment. After this Mr. Butler and I to Harper’s,
where we sat and drank for two hours till ten at night; the old woman
she was drunk and began to talk foolishly in commendation of her son
James. Home and to bed. All night troubled in my thoughts how to order
my business upon this great change with me that I could not sleep, and
being overheated with drink I made a promise the next morning to drink
no strong drink this week, for I find that it makes me sweat and puts me
quite out of order. This day it was resolved that the writs do go out in
the name of the Keepers of the Liberty, and I hear that it is resolved
privately that a treaty be offered with the King. And that Monk did
check his soldiers highly for what they did yesterday.

10th. In the morning went to my father’s, whom I took in his cutting
house,--[His father was a tailor, and this was his cutting-out
room.]--and there I told him my resolution to go to sea with my Lord,
and consulted with him how to dispose of my wife, and we resolved of
letting her be at Mr. Bowyer’s. Thence to the Treasurer of the Navy,
where I received L500 for my Lord, and having left L200 of it with
Mr. Rawlinson at his house for Sheply, I went with the rest to the Sun
tavern on Fish Street Hill, where Mr. Hill, Stevens and Mr. Hater of
the Navy Office had invited me, where we had good discourse and a fine
breakfast of Mr. Hater. Then by coach home, where I took occasion to
tell my wife of my going to sea, who was much troubled at it, and was
with some dispute at last willing to continue at Mr. Bowyer’s in my
absence. After this to see Mrs. Jem and paid her maid L7, and then to
Mr. Blackburne, who told me what Mr. Creed did say upon the news of my
coming into his place, and that he did propose to my Lord that there
should be two Secretaries, which made me go to Sir H. Wright’s where my
Lord dined and spoke with him about it, but he seemed not to agree to
the motion. Hither W. Howe comes to me and so to Westminster. In the way
he told me, what I was to provide and so forth against my going. He went
with me to my office, whither also Mr. Madge comes half foxed and played
the fool upon the violin that made me weary. Then to Whitehall and so
home and set many of my things in order against my going. My wife was
late making of caps for me, and the wench making an end of a pair of
stockings that she was knitting of. So to bed.

11th. (Sunday.) All the day busy without my band on, putting up my books
and things, in order to my going to sea. At night my wife and I went to
my father’s to supper, where J. Norton and Chas. Glascocke supt with us,
and after supper home, where the wench had provided all things against
tomorrow to wash, and so to bed, where I much troubled with my cold and
coughing.

12th. This day the wench rose at two in the morning to wash, and my wife
and I lay talking a great while. I by reason of my cold could not tell
how to sleep. My wife and I to the Exchange, where we bought a great
many things, where I left her and went into London, and at Bedells the
bookseller’s at the Temple gate I paid L12 10s. 6d. for Mr. Fuller by
his direction. So came back and at Wilkinson’s found Mr. Sheply and some
sea people, as the cook of the Nazeby and others, at dinner. Then to the
White Horse in King Street, where I got Mr. Buddle’s horse to ride to
Huntsmore to Mr. Bowyer’s, where I found him and all well, and willing
to have my wife come and board with them while I was at sea, which was
the business I went about. Here I lay and took a thing for my cold,
namely a spoonful of honey and a nutmeg scraped into it, by Mr. Bowyer’s
direction, and so took it into my mouth, which I found did do me much
good.

13th. It rained hard and I got up early, and got to London by 8 o’clock
at my Lord’s lodgings, who told me that I was to be secretary, and Creed
to be deputy treasurer to the Fleet, at which I was troubled, but I
could not help it. After that to my father’s to look after things, and
so at my shoemaker’s and others. At night to Whitehall, where I met with
Simons and Luellin at drink with them at Roberts at Whitehall. Then to
the Admiralty, where I talked with Mr. Creed till the Brothers, and they
were very seemingly willing and glad that I have the place since my Lord
would dispose of it otherwise than to them. Home and to bed. This day
the Parliament voted all that had been done by the former Rump against
the House of Lords be void, and to-night that the writs go out without
any qualification. Things seem very doubtful what will be the end of
all; for the Parliament seems to be strong for the King, while the
soldiers do all talk against.

14th. To my Lord, where infinity of applications to him and to me. To my
great trouble, my Lord gives me all the papers that was given to him, to
put in order and give him an account of them. Here I got half-a-piece of
a person of Mr. Wright’s recommending to my Lord to be Preacher of the
Speaker frigate. I went hence to St. James’s and Mr. Pierce the surgeon
with me, to speak with Mr. Clerke, Monk’s secretary, about getting some
soldiers removed out of Huntingdon to Oundle, which my Lord told me
he did to do a courtesy to the town, that he might have the greater
interest in them, in the choice of the next Parliament; not that he
intends to be chosen himself, but that he might have Mr. G. Montagu
and my Lord Mandeville chose there in spite of the Bernards. This done
(where I saw General Monk and methought he seemed a dull heavy man), he
and I to Whitehall, where with Luellin we dined at Marsh’s. Coming home
telling my wife what we had to dinner, she had a mind to some cabbage,
and I sent for some and she had it. Went to the Admiralty, where a
strange thing how I am already courted by the people. This morning among
others that came to me I hired a boy of Jenkins of Westminster and Burr
to be my clerk. This night I went to Mr. Creed’s chamber where he gave
me the former book of the proceedings in the fleet and the Seal. Then to
Harper’s where old Beard was and I took him by coach to my Lord’s, but
he was not at home, but afterwards I found him out at Sir H. Wright’s.
Thence by coach, it raining hard, to Mrs. Jem, where I staid a while,
and so home, and late in the night put up my things in a sea-chest that
Mr. Sheply lent me, and so to bed.

15th. Early packing up my things to be sent by cart with the rest of my
Lord’s. So to Will’s, where I took leave of some of my friends. Here I
met Tom Alcock, one that went to school with me at Huntingdon, but I had
not seen him these sixteen years. So in the Hall paid and made even with
Mrs. Michell; afterwards met with old Beale, and at the Axe paid him
this quarter to Ladyday next. In the afternoon Dick Mathews comes to
dine, and I went and drank with him at Harper’s. So into London by
water, and in Fish Street my wife and I bought a bit of salmon for 8d.
and went to the Sun Tavern and ate it, where I did promise to give her
all that I have in the world but my books, in case I should die at sea.
From thence homewards; in the way my wife bought linen for three smocks
and other things. I went to my Lord’s and spoke with him. So home with
Mrs. Jem by coach and then home to my own house. From thence to the Fox
in King-street to supper on a brave turkey of Mr. Hawly’s, with
some friends of his there, Will Bowyer, &c. After supper I went to
Westminster Hall, and the Parliament sat till ten at night, thinking and
being expected to dissolve themselves to-day, but they did not. Great
talk to-night that the discontented officers did think this night to
make a stir, but prevented. To the Fox again. Home with my wife, and to
bed extraordinary sleepy.

16th. No sooner out of bed but troubled with abundance of clients,
seamen. My landlord Vanly’s man came to me by my direction yesterday,
for I was there at his house as I was going to London by water, and I
paid him rent for my house for this quarter ending at Lady day, and took
an acquittance that he wrote me from his master. Then to Mr. Sheply, to
the Rhenish Tavern House, where Mr. Pim, the tailor, was, and gave us a
morning draft and a neat’s tongue. Home and with my wife to London, we
dined at my father’s, where Joyce Norton and Mr. Armiger dined also.
After dinner my wife took leave of them in order to her going to-morrow
to Huntsmore. In my way home I went to the Chapel in Chancery Lane
to bespeak papers of all sorts and other things belonging to writing
against my voyage. So home, where I spent an hour or two about my
business in my study. Thence to the Admiralty, and staid a while, so
home again, where Will Bowyer came to tell us that he would bear my wife
company in the coach to-morrow. Then to Westminster Hall, where I heard
how the Parliament had this day dissolved themselves, and did pass very
cheerfully through the Hall, and the Speaker without his mace. The whole
Hall was joyful thereat, as well as themselves, and now they begin to
talk loud of the King. To-night I am told, that yesterday, about five
o’clock in the afternoon, one came with a ladder to the Great Exchange,
and wiped with a brush the inscription that was upon King Charles, and
that there was a great bonfire made in the Exchange, and people called
out “God bless. King Charles the Second!”

     [“Then the writing in golden letters, that was engraven under the
     statue of Charles I, in the Royal Exchange [‘Exit tyrannus, Regum
     ultimus, anno libertatis Angliae, anno Domini 1648, Januarie xxx.)
     was washed out by a painter, who in the day time raised a ladder,
     and with a pot and brush washed the writing quite out, threw down
     his pot and brush and said it should never do him any more service,
     in regard that it had the honour to put out rebels’ hand-writing.
     He then came down, took away his ladder, not a misword said to him,
     and by whose order it was done was not then known.  The merchants
     were glad and joyful, many people were gathered together, and
     against the Exchange made a bonfire. “Rugge’s Diurnal.”  In the
     Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts at the British Museum is a
     pamphlet which is dated in MS. March 21st, 1659-60, where this act
     is said to be by order of Monk: “The Loyal Subjects Teares for the
     Sufferings and Absence of their Sovereign Charles II., King of
     England, Scotland, and Ireland; with an Observation upon the
     expunging of ‘Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus’, by order of General
     Monk, and some Advice to the Independents, Anabaptists, Phanatiques,
     &c.  London, 1660.”]

From the Hall I went home to bed, very sad in mind to part with my wife,
but God’s will be done.

17th. This morning bade adieu in bed to the company of my wife. We rose
and I gave my wife some money to serve her for a time, and what papers
of consequence I had. Then I left her to get her ready and went to my
Lord’s with my boy Eliezer to my Lord’s lodging at Mr. Crew’s. Here I
had much business with my Lord, and papers, great store, given me by my
Lord to dispose of as of the rest. After that, with Mr. Moore home to my
house and took my wife by coach to the Chequer in Holborn, where, after
we had drank, &c., she took coach and so farewell. I staid behind with
Tom Alcock and Mr. Anderson, my old chamber fellow at Cambridge his
brother, and drank with them there, who were come to me thither about
one that would have a place at sea. Thence with Mr. Hawly to dinner at
Mr. Crew’s. After dinner to my own house, where all things were put up
into the dining-room and locked up, and my wife took the keys along with
her.

This day, in the presence of Mr. Moore (who made it) and Mr. Hawly, I
did before I went out with my wife, seal my will to her, whereby I did
give her all that I have in the world, but my books which I give to my
brother John, excepting only French books, which my wife is to have. In
the evening at the Admiralty, I met my Lord there and got a commission
for Williamson to be captain of the Harp frigate, and afterwards went
by coach taking Mr. Crips with me to my Lord and got him to sign it at
table as he was at supper. And so to Westminster back again with him
with me, who had a great desire to go to sea and my Lord told me that he
would do him any favour. So I went home with him to his mother’s house
by me in Axe Yard, where I found Dr. Clodius’s wife and sat there
talking and hearing of old Mrs. Crisp playing of her old lessons upon
the harpsichon till it was time to go to bed. After that to bed, and
Laud, her son lay with me in the best chamber in her house, which indeed
was finely furnished.

18th. I rose early and went to the barber’s (Jervas) in Palace Yard and
I was trimmed by him, and afterwards drank with him a cup or two of ale,
and did begin to hire his man to go with me to sea. Then to my Lord’s
lodging where I found Captain Williamson and gave him his commission
to be Captain of the Harp, and he gave me a piece of gold and 20s. in
silver. So to my own house, where I staid a while and then to dinner
with Mr. Shepley at my Lord’s lodgings. After that to Mr. Mossum’s,
where he made a very gallant sermon upon “Pray for the life of the King
and the King’s son.” (Ezra vi. 10.) From thence to Mr. Crew’s, but my
Lord not being within I did not stay, but went away and met with Mr.
Woodfine, who took me to an alehouse in Drury Lane, and we sat and drank
together, and ate toasted cakes which were very good, and we had a great
deal of mirth with the mistress of the house about them. From thence
homewards, and called at Mr. Blagrave’s, where I took up my note that he
had of mine for 40s., which he two years ago did give me as a pawn while
he had my lute. So that all things are even between him and I. So to
Mrs. Crisp, where she and her daughter and son and I sat talking
till ten o’clock at night, I giving them the best advice that I could
concerning their son, how he should go to sea, and so to bed.

19th. Early to my Lord, where infinity of business to do, which makes
my head full; and indeed, for these two or three days, I have not been
without a great many cares and thoughts concerning them. After that to
the Admiralty, where a good while with Mr. Blackburne, who told me that
it was much to be feared that the King would come in, for all good men
and good things were now discouraged. Thence to Wilkinson’s, where
Mr. Sheply and I dined; and while we were at dinner, my Lord Monk’s
lifeguard come by with the Serjeant at Arms before them, with two
Proclamations, that all Cavaliers do depart the town; but the other that
all officers that were lately disbanded should do the same. The last of
which Mr. R. Creed, I remember, said, that he looked upon it as if they
had said, that all God’s people should depart the town. Thence with some
sea officers to the Swan, where we drank wine till one comes to me to
pay me some money from Worcester, viz., L25. His name is Wilday. I sat
in another room and took my money and drank with him till the rest of my
company were gone and so we parted. Going home the water was high,
and so I got Crockford to carry me over it. So home, and left my money
there. All the discourse now-a-day is, that the King will come again;
and for all I see, it is the wishes of all; and all do believe that it
will be so. My mind is still much troubled for my poor wife, but I hope
that this undertaking will be worth my pains. To Whitehall and staid
about business at the Admiralty late, then to Tony Robins’s, where Capt.
Stokes, Mr. Luddington and others were, and I did solicit the Captain
for Laud Crisp, who gave me a promise that he would entertain him. After
that to Mrs. Crisp’s where Dr. Clodius and his wife were. He very merry
with drink. We played at cards late and so to bed. This day my Lord
dined at my Lord Mayor’s [Allen], and Jasper was made drunk, which my
Lord was very angry at.

20th. This morning I rose early and went to my house to put things in a
little order against my going, which I conceive will be to-morrow (the
weather still very rainy). After that to my Lord, where I found very
great deal of business, he giving me all letters and papers that come
to him about business, for me to give him account of when we come
on shipboard. Hence with Capt. Isham by coach to Whitehall to the
Admiralty. He and I and Chetwind, Doling and Luellin dined together at
Marsh’s at Whitehall. So to the Bull Head whither W. Simons comes to us
and I gave them my foy

     [Foy. A feast given by one who is about to leave a place.  In Kent,
     according to Grose, a treat to friends, either at going abroad or
     coming home.  See Diary, November 25th, 1661.]

against my going to sea; and so we took leave one of another, they
promising me to write to me to sea. Hither comes Pim’s boy, by my
direction, with two monteeres--[Monteeres, montero (Spanish), a kind of
huntsman’s cap.]--for me to take my choice of, and I chose the saddest
colour and left the other for Mr. Sheply. Hence by coach to London, and
took a short melancholy leave of my father and mother, without having
them to drink, or say anything of business one to another. And indeed I
had a fear upon me I should scarce ever see my mother again, she having
a great cold then upon her. Then to Westminster, where by reason of rain
and an easterly wind, the water was so high that there was boats rowed
in King Street and all our yard was drowned, that one could not go to my
house, so as no man has seen the like almost, most houses full of water.

     [“In this month the wind was very high, and caused great tides, so
     that great hurt was done to the inhabitants of Westminster, King
     Street being quite drowned.  The Maidenhead boat was cast away, and
     twelve persons with her.  Also, about Dover the waters brake in upon
     the mainland; and in Kent was very much damage done; so that report
     said, there was L20,000 worth of harm done.”--Rugge’s Diurnal.--B.]

Then back by coach to my Lord’s; where I met Mr. Sheply, who staid with
me waiting for my Lord’s coming in till very late. Then he and I, and
William Howe went with our swords to bring my Lord home from Sir H.
Wright’s. He resolved to go to-morrow if the wind ceased. Sheply and I
home by coach. I to Mrs. Crisp’s, who had sat over a good supper long
looking for me. So we sat talking and laughing till it was very late,
and so Laud and I to bed.

21st. To my Lord’s, but the wind very high against us, and the weather
bad we could not go to-day; here I did very much business, and then to
my Lord Widdrington’s from my Lord, with his desire that he might have
the disposal of the writs of the Cinque Ports. My Lord was very civil to
me, and called for wine, and writ a long letter in answer. Thence I went
to a tavern over against Mr. Pierce’s with judge Advocate Fowler and Mr.
Burr, and sat and drank with them two or three pints of wine. After that
to Mr. Crew’s again and gave my Lord an account of what I had done, and
so about my business to take leave of my father and mother, which by
a mistake I have put down yesterday. Thence to Westminster to Crisp’s,
where we were very merry; the old woman sent for a supper for me, and
gave me a handkercher with strawberry buttons on it, and so to bed.

22nd. Up very early and set things in order at my house, and so took
leave of Mrs. Crispe and her daughter (who was in bed) and of Mrs. Hunt.
Then to my Lord’s lodging at the gate and did so there, where Mr. Hawly
came to me and I gave him the key of my house to keep, and he went with
me to Mr. Crew’s, and there I took my last leave of him. But the weather
continuing very bad my Lord would not go to-day. My Lord spent this
morning private in sealing of his last will and testament with Mr. W.
Mountagu. After that I went forth about my own business to buy a pair of
riding grey serge stockings and sword and belt and hose, and after that
took Wotton and Brigden to the Pope’s Head Tavern in Chancery Lane,
where Gilb. Holland and Shelston were, and we dined and drank a great
deal of wine, and they paid all. Strange how these people do now promise
me anything; one a rapier, the other a vessel of wine or a gun, and one
offered me his silver hatband to do him a courtesy. I pray God to
keep me from being proud or too much lifted up hereby. After that to
Westminster, and took leave of Kate Sterpin who was very sorry to part
with me, and after that of Mr. George Mountagu, and received my warrant
of Mr. Blackburne, to be Secretary to the two Generals of the Fleet.
Then to take my leave of the Clerks of the Council, and thence Doling
and Luellin would have me go with them to Mount’s chamber, where we
sat and talked and then I went away. So to my Lord (in my way meeting
Chetwind and Swan and bade them farewell) where I lay all night with Mr.
Andrews. This day Mr. Sheply went away on board and I sent my boy with
him. This day also Mrs. Jemimah went to Marrowbone, so I could not see
her. Mr. Moore being out of town to-night I could not take leave of him
nor speak to him about business which troubled me much. I left my small
case therefore with Mr. Andrews for him.

23rd. Up early, carried my Lord’s will in a black box to Mr. William
Montagu for him to keep for him. Then to the barber’s and put on my
cravat there. So to my Lord again, who was almost ready to be gone and
had staid for me. Hither came Gilb. Holland, and brought me a stick
rapier and Shelston a sugar-loaf, and had brought his wife who he said
was a very pretty woman to the Ship tavern hard by for me to see but
I could not go. Young Reeve also brought me a little perspective glass
which I bought for my Lord, it cost me 8s. So after that my Lord in Sir
H. Wright’s coach with Captain Isham, Mr. Thomas, John Crew, W. Howe,
and I in a Hackney to the Tower, where the barges staid for us; my Lord
and the Captain in one, and W. Howe and I, &c., in the other, to the
Long Reach, where the Swiftsure lay at anchor; (in our way we saw the
great breach which the late high water had made, to the loss of many
L1000 to the people about Limehouse.) Soon as my Lord on board, the
guns went off bravely from the ships. And a little while after comes the
Vice-Admiral Lawson, and seemed very respectful to my Lord, and so did
the rest of the Commanders of the frigates that were thereabouts. I to
the cabin allotted for me, which was the best that any had that belonged
to my Lord. I got out some things out of my chest for writing and to
work presently, Mr. Burr and I both. I supped at the deck table with Mr.
Sheply. We were late writing of orders for the getting of ships ready,
&c.; and also making of others to all the seaports between Hastings and
Yarmouth, to stop all dangerous persons that are going or coming between
Flanders and there. After that to bed in my cabin, which was but short;
however I made shift with it and slept very well, and the weather being
good I was not sick at all yet, I know not what I shall be.

24th. At work hard all the day writing letters to the Council, &c. This
day Mr. Creed came on: board and dined very boldly with my Lord, but
he could not get a bed there. At night Capt. Isham who had been at
Gravesend all last night and to-day came and brought Mr. Lucy (one
acquainted with Mrs. Pierce, with whom I had been at her house), I drank
with him in the Captain’s cabin, but my business could not stay with
him. I despatch many letters to-day abroad and it was late before we
could get to bed. Mr. Sheply and Howe supped with me in my cabin. The
boy Eliezer flung down a can of beer upon my papers which made me give
him a box of the ear, it having all spoiled my papers and cost me a
great deal of work. So to bed.

25th. (Lord’s day). About two o’clock in the morning, letters came from
London by our coxon, so they waked me, but I would not rise but bid him
stay till morning, which he did, and then I rose and carried them in
to my Lord, who read them a-bed. Among the rest, there was the writ
and mandate for him to dispose to the Cinque Ports for choice of
Parliament-men. There was also one for me from Mr. Blackburne, who with
his own hand superscribes it to S.P. Esq., of which God knows I was
not a little proud. After that I wrote a letter to the Clerk of Dover
Castle, to come to my Lord about issuing of those writs. About ten
o’clock Mr. Ibbott, at the end of the long table, begun to pray
and preach and indeed made a very good sermon, upon the duty of all
Christians to be stedfast in faith. After that Captain Cuttance and
I had oysters, my Lord being in his cabin not intending to stir out
to-day. After that up into the great cabin above to dinner with the
Captain, where was Captain Isham and all the officers of the ship. I
took place of all but the Captains; after dinner I wrote a great many
letters to my friends at London. After that, sermon again, at which I
slept, God forgive me! After that, it being a fair day, I walked with
the Captain upon the deck talking. At night I supped with him and after
that had orders from my Lord about some business to be done against
to-morrow, which I sat up late and did and then to bed.

26th. This day it is two years since it pleased God that I was cut of
the stone at Mrs. Turner’s in Salisbury Court. And did resolve while I
live to keep it a festival, as I did the last year at my house, and for
ever to have Mrs. Turner and her company with me. But now it pleases God
that I am where I am and so prevented to do it openly; only within my
soul I can and do rejoice, and bless God, being at this time blessed be
his holy name, in as good health as ever I was in my life. This morning
I rose early, and went about making of an establishment of the whole
Fleet, and a list of all the ships, with the number of men and guns:
About an hour after that, we had a meeting of the principal commanders
and seamen, to proportion out the number of these things. After that
to dinner, there being very many commanders on board. All the afternoon
very many orders were made, till I was very weary. At night Mr. Sheply
and W. Howe came and brought some bottles of wine and some things to eat
in my cabin, where we were very merry, remembering the day of being
cut for the stone. Captain Cuttance came afterwards and sat drinking a
bottle of wine till eleven, a kindness he do not usually do the greatest
officer in the ship. After that to bed.

27th. Early in the morning at making a fair new establishment of the
Fleet to send to the Council. This morning, the wind came about, and we
fell into the Hope,--[A reach of the Thames near Tilbury.]--and in our
passing by the Vice-Admiral, he and the rest of the frigates, with him,
did give us abundance of guns and we them, so much that the report of
them broke all the windows in my cabin and broke off the iron bar that
was upon it to keep anybody from creeping in at the Scuttle.--[“A small
hole or port cut either in the deck or side of a ship, generally for
ventilation. That in the deck is a small hatch-way.”--Smyth’s Sailor’s
Word-Book.]--This noon I sat the first time with my Lord at table since
my coming to sea. All the afternoon exceeding busy in writing of letters
and orders. In the afternoon, Sir Harry Wright came onboard us, about
his business of being chosen Parliament-man. My Lord brought him to see
my cabin, when I was hard a-writing. At night supped with my Lord too,
with the Captain, and after that to work again till it be very late. So
to bed.

28th. This morning and the whole day busy, and that the more because Mr.
Burr was about his own business all the day at Gravesend. At night there
was a gentleman very well bred, his name was Banes, going for Flushing,
who spoke French and Latin very well, brought by direction from Captain
Clerke hither, as a prisoner, because he called out of the vessel that
he went in, “Where is your King, we have done our business, Vive le
Roi.” He confessed himself a Cavalier in his heart, and that he and his
whole family had fought for the King; but that he was then drunk, having
been all night taking his leave at Gravesend the night before, and
so could not remember what it was that he said; but in his words and
carriage showed much of a gentleman. My Lord had a great kindness for
him, but did not think it safe to release him, but commanded him to
be used civilly, so he was taken to the Master’s Cabin and had supper
there. In the meantime I wrote a letter to the Council about him, and an
order for the vessel to be sent for back that he was taken out of. But
a while after, he sent a letter down to my Lord, which my Lord did like
very well, and did advise with me what was best to be done. So I put in
something to my Lord and then to the Captain that the gentleman was to
be released and the letter stopped, which was done. So I went up and sat
and talked with him in Latin and French, and drank a bottle or two with
him; and about eleven at night he took boat again, and so God bless him.
Thence I to my cabin and to bed. This day we had news of the election at
Huntingdon for Bernard and Pedly, at which my Lord was much troubled for
his friends’ missing of it.

29th. We lie still a little below Gravesend. At night Mr. Sheply
returned from London, and told us of several elections for the next
Parliament. That the King’s effigies was new making to be set up in
the Exchange again. This evening was a great whispering of some of the
Vice-Admiral’s captains that they were dissatisfied, and did intend to
fight themselves, to oppose the General. But it was soon hushed, and the
Vice-Admiral did wholly deny any such thing, and protested to stand by
the General. At night Mr. Sheply, W. Howe, and I supped in my cabin. So
up to the Master’s cabin, where we sat talking, and then to bed.

30th. I was saluted in the morning with two letters, from some that I
had done a favour to, which brought me in each a piece of gold. This
day, while my Lord and we were at dinner, the Nazeby came in sight
towards us, and at last came to anchor close by us. After dinner my Lord
and many others went on board her, where every thing was out of order,
and a new chimney made for my Lord in his bedchamber, which he was much
pleased with. My Lord, in his discourse, discovered a great deal of love
to this ship.

31st. This morning Captain Jowles of the “Wexford” came on board, for
whom I got commission from my Lord to be commander of the ship. Upon the
doing thereof he was to make the 20s. piece that he sent me yesterday,
up L5; wherefore he sent me a bill that he did owe me L4., which I sent
my boy to Gravesend with him, and he did give the boy L4 for me, and the
boy gave him the bill under his hand. This morning, Mr. Hill that lives
in Axe-yard was here on board with the Vice-Admiral. I did give him a
bottle of wine, and was exceedingly satisfied of the power that I have
to make my friends welcome. Many orders to make all the afternoon. At
night Mr. Sheply, Howe, Ibbott, and I supped in my cabin together.




APRIL 1660

April 1st (Lord’s day). Mr. Ibbott preached very well. After dinner my
Lord did give me a private list of all the ships that were to be set out
this summer, wherein I do discern that he bath made it his care to put
by as much of the Anabaptists as he can. By reason of my Lord and my
being busy to send away the packet by Mr. Cooke of the Nazeby, it was
four o’clock before we could begin sermon again. This day Captain Guy
come on board from Dunkirk, who tells me that the King will come in, and
that the soldiers at Dunkirk do drink the King’s health in the streets.
At night the Captain, Sir R. Stayner, Mr. Sheply, and I did sup together
in the Captain’s cabin. I made a commission for Captain Wilgness, of
the Bear, to-night, which got me 30s. So after writing a while I went to
bed.

2d. Up very early, and to get all my things and my boy’s packed up.
Great concourse of commanders here this morning to take leave of my Lord
upon his going into the Nazeby, so that the table was full, so there
dined below many commanders, and Mr. Creed, who was much troubled to
hear that he could not go along with my Lord, for he had already got all
